Book II

Theory Applied




CHAPTER I

A LIBERAL EDUCATION IN ELEMENTARY SCHOOLS


I need not waste time in attempting to convince the reader of what
we all know, that a liberal education is, like justice, religion,
liberty, fresh air, the natural birthright of every child. Neither
need we discuss the scope of such an education. We are aware that
good life implies cultivated intelligence, that, according to the
Platonic axiom, ‘Knowledge is virtue,’ even though there be many
exceptions to the rule. Educated teachers are not slow to perceive
the part the Humanities play in a worthy scheme of education, but
they are faced by enormous difficulties which are admirably summed
up in a recent work,--[42]

  “The tragedy of modern education has been the prolonged failure
  of Humanism to secure conditions under which its purpose might be
  realised for the people at large.”

It is because we (of the Parents’ Union School) have succeeded in
offering Humanism under such conditions that we believe the great
problem of education is at last solved. We are able to offer the
Humanities (in the mother tongue) to large classes of children from
illiterate homes in such a way that the teaching is received with
delight and freely assimilated. One swallow does not make a summer,
we all know, but the experience of one school shows that it is
possible to carry out a pretty full literary programme joyously and
without effort while including all the usual school activities.
Wireless telegraphy was, so to speak, in the air before the first
Marconi message was sent, but that first wireless message made
it possible for any passenger on board a Channel steamer to send
such a message. Just so, the experiment in the Drighlington School
(Yorkshire) placed the conditions for a humanistic education at the
service of any teacher. I am much impressed by the amount of work
of this kind which is already being done in our schools. I heard
the other day of a man whose whole life had been elevated by a
single inspiring (poetic) sentence which he heard as a schoolboy;
we have been told that the ‘man in the street’ cannot resist a row
of books; we are told, too, that the War has made us a nation of
readers, both at home and in the trenches, readers largely of the
best books in poetry and history; is there no credit due to the
schools for these things? But teachers are not satisfied; their
reach is greater than their grasp and they are more aware of the
sordid lives about them, of the “dull, unfeeling, barren ignorance”
which prevails, than of any success they have yet attained.
Therefore they fret under the time limitations which seem to make
it impossible to do anything worth while in such vast subjects as
History and Literature, for example.

I wonder does this uneasiness point to a fact which we are slow
to realise,--that the requirements of the mind are very much like
those of the body? Both require as conditions of health,--activity,
variety, rest and, above all, food. There has been some tendency
among us to offer gymnastics, whether intellectual or physical,
by way of a square meal of knowledge, which is as if one were
to invite a boy to Swedish Drill by way of his dinner; and that
wretched misnomer ‘education’ is partly to blame. Now, potency,
not property, is the characteristic of mind. A child is able to
deal with much knowledge, but he possesses none worth speaking
of; yet we set to work to give him that potency which he already
possesses rather than the knowledge which he lacks; we train
his reason, cultivate his judgment, exercise this and the other
faculty, which we have no more to do with than with the digestive
processes of a healthy child; we know that the more we meddle with
these the worse for the child; but what if the devitalisation
we notice in so many of our young people, keen about games but
dead to things of the mind, is due to the processes carried on
in our schools, to our plausible and pleasant ways of picturing,
eliciting, demonstrating, illustrating, summarising, doing all
those things for children which they are born with the potency to
do for themselves? No doubt we do give intellectual food, but too
little of it; let us have courage and we shall be surprised, as we
are now and then, at the amount of intellectual strong meat almost
any child will take at a meal and digest at his leisure.

Perhaps the first thing for us to do is to get a just perception
of what I may call the relativity of knowledge and the mind. The
mind receives knowledge, not in order that it may know, but in
order that it may grow, in breadth and depth, in sound judgment and
magnanimity; but in order to grow, it _must know_.

The fact is that we are handicapped, not so much by the three or
four difficulties I have already indicated, as by certain errors of
judgment, forms of depreciation, which none of us escape because
they are universal. We as teachers depreciate ourselves and our
office; we do not realise that in the nature of things the teacher
has a prophetic power of appeal and inspiration, that his part
is not the weariful task of spoon-feeding with pap-meat, but the
delightful commerce of equal minds where his is the part of guide,
philosopher and friend. The friction of wills which makes school
work harassing ceases to a surprising degree when we deal with the
children, mind to mind, through the medium of knowledge.

Next, we depreciate children, even though most teachers lay down
their lives for their charges with amazing devotion. We have been
so long taught to regard children as products of education and
environment, that we fail to realise that from the first they are
persons; and, as Carlyle has well said,--

  “The mystery of a person, indeed, is ever divine, to him that has
  a sense for the godlike.”

We must either reverence or despise children; and while we regard
them as incomplete and undeveloped beings who will one day arrive
at the completeness of man, rather than as weak and ignorant
persons, whose ignorance we must inform and whose weakness we must
support, but whose potentialities are as great as our own, we
cannot do otherwise than despise children, however kindly and even
tenderly we commit the offence.

As soon as he gets words with which to communicate with us, a
child lets us know that he thinks with surprising clearness and
directness, that he sees with a closeness of observation that
we have long lost, that he enjoys and that he sorrows with an
intensity we have ceased to experience, that he loves with an
abandon and a confidence which, alas, we do not share, that he
imagines with a fecundity no artist among us can approach that he
acquires intellectual knowledge and mechanical skill at a rate so
amazing, that, could the infant’s rate of progress be kept up to
manhood, he would surely appropriate the whole field of knowledge
in a single lifetime! (It is worth while in this connection to
re-read the early chapters of _David Copperfield_.)

I am considering a child as he is, and am not tracing him, either
with Wordsworth, to the heights above, or, with the evolutionist,
to the depths below; because a person is a mystery, that is,
we cannot explain him or account for him, but must accept him
as he is. This wonder of personality does not cease, does not
disappear, when a child goes to school; he is still ‘all there’
in quite another sense from that of the vulgar catch-word. But we
begin to lose the way to his mind from the day that he enters the
schoolroom; the reason for this is, we have embraced the belief
that ‘knowledge is sensation,’ that a child knows what he sees and
handles rather than what he conceives in his mind and figures in
his thoughts. I labour this point because our faith in a child’s
spiritual, _i.e._, intellectual educability is one of our chief
assets. Having brought ourselves face to face with the wonder of
mind in children, we begin to see that knowledge is the aliment
of the mind as food is that of the body. In the days before the
War, a lifetime ago it seems, our insular contempt for knowledge
was a by-word; except for a schoolmaster or other thinker here and
there, nobody took knowledge seriously; we announced boldly that
it did not matter what a child learned but only how he learned
it. As for mere ‘book-learning,’ for that we had a fine contempt!
But we have changed all that. We are beginning to suspect that
ignorance is our national stumbling-block, a chief cause of those
difficulties at home which hinder our efforts abroad. For ignorance
there is only one cure, and that is, knowledge; his school is the
seat of knowledge for a child, and whatever else his teachers do
for him, first of all they must sustain him with knowledge, not in
homœopathic doses, but in regular, generous servings. If we ask,
what is knowledge?--there is no neat and ready answer at hand.
Matthew Arnold, we know, classifies all knowledge under three
heads,--the knowledge of God, divinity, the knowledge of man,
known as the ‘humanities’ and the knowledge of the physical world,
science, and that is enough to go on with. But I should like to
question this division and to class all three parts of knowledge
under the head of Humanism, which should include all knowledge
that makes a direct appeal to the mind through the channel of
literary form; now, the substance of Divinity is contained in
one of the three great literatures of the world, and Science, in
France if not usually in England, is embodied in a beautiful and
poetic literature of great clarity, precision and grace. Is it
not then allowable to include all knowledge of which literature
is a proper medium under the head of ‘Humanism’? One thing at any
rate we know with certainty, that no teaching, no information
becomes knowledge to any of us until the individual mind has acted
upon it, translated it, transformed, absorbed it, to reappear,
like our bodily food, in forms of vitality. Therefore, teaching,
talk and tale, however lucid or fascinating, effect nothing until
self-activity be set up; that is, self-education is the only
possible education; the rest is mere veneer laid on the surface of
a child’s nature.

I have endeavoured to call your attention to a certain undervaluing
of children and undervaluing of knowledge which seem to me to mar
our twentieth century ideal of education, fine as that is. If we
realise that the mind and knowledge are like two members of a ball
and socket joint, two limbs of a pair of scissors, fitted to each
other, necessary to each other and acting only in concert, we shall
understand that our function as teachers is to supply children with
the rations of knowledge which they require; and that the rest,
character and conduct, efficiency and ability, and, that finest
quality of the citizen, magnanimity, take care of themselves. “But
how?” cries the teacher, whose life is spent in the labour of
Sisyphus. I think we have chanced on a way that, at any rate, works
to admiration, the principles and practice of which I am anxious to
bring before you.

Let me first repeat[43] a few of the results that have been made
good by thousands of children, and within the last few years by
many Council Schools throughout the country:--

The children, not the teachers, are the responsible persons; they
do the work by self-effort.

The teachers give the uplift of their sympathy in the work and
where necessary elucidate, sum up or enlarge, but the actual work
is done by the scholars.

These read in a term from one thousand to between two and three
thousand pages, according to age and class, in a large number of
set books; the quantity set for each lesson allows of only a single
reading.

The reading is tested by narration, or by writing on a test passage.

No revision is attempted when the terminal examination is at hand;
because too much ground has been covered to allow of any ‘looking
up.’

What the children have read they know, and write on any part of it
with ease and fluency, in vigorous English. They usually spell well.

During the examinations, which last a week, the children cover say
from twenty to sixty sheets of Cambridge paper, according to age
and class; but if ten times as many questions were set on the work
studied most likely they would cover ten times as much paper.

It rarely happens that all the children in a class are not able
to answer all the questions set in such subjects as history,
literature, citizenship, geography, science. But here differences
manifest themselves; some children do better in history, some in
science, some in arithmetic, others in literature; some, again,
write copious answers and a few write sparsely; but practically all
know the answers to the set questions.

In the course of an examination they deal freely with a great
number of substantives, including many proper names; I once had the
names used by a child of ten in an examination paper counted; there
were well over a hundred, of which these are the ‘A’s’--

  Africa, Alsace-Lorraine, Abdomen, Antigonons, Antennæ, Aphis,
  Antwerp, Alder, America, Amsterdam, Austria-Hungary, Ann Boleyn,
  Antarctic, Atlantic;

and these are the ‘M’s,’--

  Megalopolis, Maximilian, Milan, Martin Luther, Mary of the
  Netherlands, Messina, Macedonia, Magna Charta, Magnet, Malta,
  Metz, Mediterranean, Mary Queen of Scots, Treaty of Madrid;

and upon all these subjects the children wrote as freely and fully
as if they were writing to an absent sister about a new family of
kittens!

The children write with perfect understanding as far as they go
and there is rarely a ‘howler’ in hundreds of sets of papers.
They have an enviable power of getting at the gist of a book or
subject. Sometimes they are asked to write verses about a personage
or an event; the result is not remarkable by way of poetry, but
sums up a good deal of thoughtful reading in a delightful way; for
example,--the reading of _King Lear_ is gathered in twelve lines on
‘Cordelia,’--

CORDELIA

      Nobliest lady, doomed to slaughter,
      An unlov’d, unpitied daughter,
      Though Cordelia thou may’st be,
      “Love’s” the fittest name for thee;
      If love doth not, maid, bestow
      Scorn for scorn, and “no” for “no,”
      If love loves through scorn and spite,
      If love clings to truth and right,
      If love’s pure, maid, as thou art,
      If love has a faithful heart,
      Thou art then the same as love;
      Come from God’s own realms above!

                       M. K. C. 10-10/12 Form II.

A life of Livingstone (read in connection with the Geography of
Africa) is thus epitomised,--

LIVINGSTONE

      “The whole of Africa is desert bare,
      Except around the coast.” So people said,
      And thought of that great continent no more.
      “The smoke of thousand villages I’ve seen!”
      So cried a man. He knew no more. His words
      Sank down into one heart there to remain.
      The man who heard rose up and gave his all:
      Into the dark unknown he went alone.
      What terrors did he face? The native’s hate,
      The fever, tetse-fly and loneliness.
      But to the people there he brought great Light.
      Who was this man, the son of some great lord?
      Not so. He was a simple Scottish lad
      Who learnt to follow duty’s path. His name
      Was Livingstone, he will not be forgot.

                                E. P. (15.) Form IV.

And here is a rendering of Plutarch’s _Life of Pericles_ by a girl
of fourteen in Form IV,--

      Oh! land, whose beauty and unrivalled fame;
      Lies dead, obscure in Time’s great dusty vault.
      Not so in memory, for truly here,
      Each and alike look up and do revear
      Those heroes of the hidden past. Plato,
      Who’s understanding reached the wide world’s end;
      Aristides, that just and noble man.
      And last, not least, the great wise Pericles
      Who’s socialistic views and clever ways
      For governing the rich and poor alike
      Were to be envied. In his eyes must Greece
      Live for ever as the home of beauty.
      So to the Gods great marble shrines he made,
      Temples and theatres did he erect;
      So that the beauty of his beloved Greece
      Might live for ever. And now when seeing
      What is left of all those wondrous sights
      We think not of the works _themselves_
      But rather of the man who had them built.

                                                 J. F.

One wonders is ‘socialistic’ used for democratic; any way, the
notion is original. There is little to be said for the technique of
the verses but I think the reader will agree that each set shows
thoughtful appreciation of some part of the term’s reading. The
verses are uncorrected.

Much use is made according to this method of the years from 6 to
8, during which children must learn to read and write; they get at
the same time, however, a good deal of consecutive knowledge of
history and geography, tale and fable, some of which at the end of
the term they dictate in answer to questions and their answers form
well-expressed little essays on the subjects they deal with.

The time appropriated in the time-table at this stage to the
teaching of some half-dozen more or less literary subjects such as
Scripture, and the subjects I have indicated, is largely spent by
the teachers in reading, say, two or three paragraphs at a time
from some one of the set books, which children, here and there
in the class, narrate. The teacher reads with the intention that
the children shall know, and therefore, with distinctness, force,
and careful enunciation; it is a mere matter of sympathy, though
of course it is the author and not himself, whom the teacher is
careful to produce. This practice, of the teacher reading aloud
and the class narrating, is necessarily continued through all the
classes of an elementary school, because some of the books used
are rather costly and only one copy is furnished. I wonder does
this habit of listening with close attention to what is read aloud
tend to equalise the children of the ‘uneducated’ with those of the
educated classes? Certainly, the work of the two is surprisingly
equal. By the way, there is no selection of subjects, passages or
episodes on the ground of interest. The best available book is
chosen and read through in the course, it may be, of two or three
years.

Let me add that the appeal of these principles and this method
is not to the clever child only but to the average and even to
the ‘backward’ child; indeed we have had several marked successes
with backward children. Just as we all partake of that banquet
which is ‘Shakespeare’ according to our needs and desires, so do
the children behave at the ample board set before them; there
is enough to satisfy the keenest intelligence while the dullest
child is sustained through his own willing effort. This scheme
of fairly wide and successful intellectual work is carried out
in the same or less time than is occupied in the usual efforts
in the same directions; there are no revisions, no evening
preparations (because far more work is done by the children in
ordinary school-time than under ordinary school methods, when the
child is too often a listener only): no note-taking, because none
are necessary, the children having the matter in their books and
knowing where to find it; and as there is no cramming or working up
of subjects there is much time to spare for vocational and other
work of the kind.

Such an education as I am urging should act as a social lever also;
everyone is much occupied with problems concerning amelioration of
life for our ‘poorer classes’ but do we sufficiently consider that,
given a better education, the problems of decent living will for
the most part be solved by the people themselves?

Like all great ventures of life this that I propose is a venture
of faith, faith in the saving power of knowledge and in the
assimilative power of children. Its efficacy depends upon the fact
that it is in the nature of things, that is, in the nature of
knowledge and in the nature of children. Bring the two together in
ways that are sanctioned by the laws of mind and, to use a figure,
a chemical combination takes place and a new product appears, a
person of character and intelligence, an admirable citizen whose
own life is too full and rich for him to be an uneasy member of
society.

Education is part and parcel of religion and every enthusiastic
teacher knows that he is obeying the precept,--‘feed my
lambs’--feed with all those things which are good and wholesome for
the spirit of a man; and, before all and including all, with the
knowledge of God.

I have ventured to speak of the laws of mind, or spirit, but indeed
we can only make guesses here and there and follow with diffidence
such light as we get from the teachings of the wise and from
general experience; general experience, because peculiar experience
is apt to be misleading; therefore, when I learned that long tried
principles and methods were capable of application to the whole of
a class of forty children in the school of a mining village, I felt
assured that we were following laws whose observance results in
education of a satisfying kind.

The mind requires sustenance as does the body, that it may increase
and be strong; so much everybody knows. A long time ago it was
perceived that the pabulum given in schools was of the wrong
sort; Grammar rules, lists of names and dates and places,--the
whole stock in trade of the earlier schoolmaster--was found to
be matter which the minds of children reject: and, because we
were wise enough to see that the mind functions for its own
nourishment whether in rejecting or receiving, we changed our
tactics, following, so we thought, the lead of the children. We
did well, and therefore are prepared, if necessary, to do better.
What, then, if our whole educational equipment, our illustrations,
elucidations, questionings, our illimitable patience in getting a
point into the children, were all based on the false assumption of
the immature, which we take to connote the imperfect, incomplete
minds of children? “I think I could understand, Mummy, if you did
not explain quite so much,”--is this the inarticulate cry of the
school child to-day? He really is capable of much more than he
gets credit for, but we go the wrong way about getting his capable
mind into action.

We err when we allow our admirable teaching to intervene between
children and the knowledge their minds demand. The desire for
knowledge (curiosity) is the chief agent in education: but this
desire may be made powerless like an unused limb by encouraging
other desires to intervene, such as the desire for place
(emulation), for prizes (avarice), for power (ambition), for praise
(vanity). But I am told that marks, places and prizes (except for
attendance) do not figure largely in Elementary Schools, therefore
the love of knowledge for its own sake is likely to have a freer
course in these schools than in others.

That children are born persons,--is the first article of the
educational _credo_ which I am concerned to advance; this implies
that they come to us with power of attention, avidity for
knowledge, clearness of thought, nice discrimination in books even
before they can read, and the power of dealing with many subjects.

Practical teachers will say, guarantee to us the attention of our
scholars and we will guarantee their progress in what Colet calls
‘good literature,’ I have already explained[44] how I came to a
solution of this puzzling problem,--how to secure attention.

Let me add again that the principles and methods I have indicated
are especially suitable for large classes; what is called the
‘sympathy of numbers’ stimulates the class, and the work goes with
added impetus: each child is eager to take part in narration or
to do written work well. By the way, only short test answers are
required in writing, so that the labour of correction is minimised.

To two further points I must invite attention; the choice of books
and the character of the terminal examinations. I do not know
better how to describe the sort of books that children’s minds will
consent to deal with than by saying that they must be literary
in character. A child of seven or eight will narrate a difficult
passage from _The Pilgrim’s Progress_, say, with extraordinary
zest and insight; but I doubt if he or his elders would retain
anything from that excellent work, Dr. Smiles’s _Self-Help_! The
completeness with which hundreds of children reject the wrong book
is a curious and instructive experience, not less so than the
avidity and joy with which they drain the right book to the dregs;
children’s requirements in the matter seem to be quantity, quality
and variety: but the question of books is one of much delicacy and
difficulty. After the experience of over a quarter of a century[45]
in selecting the lesson books proper to children of all ages, we
still make mistakes, and the next examination paper discovers the
error! Children cannot answer questions set on the wrong book; and
the difficulty of selection is increased by the fact that what they
like in books is no more a guide than what they like in food.

The moment has come to try the great cause of _Education v.
Civilisation_, with the result, let us hope, that the latter will
retire to her proper sphere of service in the amelioration of
life and will not intrude on the higher functions of inspiration
and direction which belong to Education. Both Civilisation and
Education are the handmaids of Religion, but, each in its place,
and the one may not thrust herself into the office of the other.
It is a gain, any way, that we are within sight of giving to all
members of the working classes notwithstanding their limited
opportunities that stability of mind and magnanimity of character
which are the proper outcome and the unfailing test of a LIBERAL
EDUCATION; also it is to the good that “the grand elementary
principle of pleasure” should be discovered in unexpected places,
in what is too often the drudgery of the schoolroom.

Milton’s ideal of a “complete and generous education” meets our
occasions;--“that which fits a man to perform justly, skilfully
and magnanimously all the offices both private and public of peace
and war”; and perhaps it remains for our generation to prove that
this ideal is open to and necessary for persons of all sorts and
conditions. It has been well said that,--

  “Just as there is only one kind of truth common to us all, so
  there is only one education common to us all. In the case of the
  education of the people the only question is: How is this common
  education to be developed under the circumstances of simple
  conditions of life and large masses of people? That this should
  be accomplished is the decisive mark of all real education.”

The writer (Eucken) offers no solution of this problem: and it
remains with the reader to determine each with himself whether that
solution which I here propose is or is not worth a trial.




CHAPTER II

A LIBERAL EDUCATION IN SECONDARY SCHOOLS


Mighty is the power of persistent advertisement. The author of _The
Pagan_ may or may not be bringing an indictment against Pelmanism,
but without any doubt ‘Pelmanism’ is bringing an indictment against
secondary education. Half a million souls, Judges and Generals,
Admirals and Barristers, are protesting that they have not been
educated. No doubt the spirit that informs advertisements is often
a lying spirit but claims so well attested as these may have
something in them, and we who are engaged in secondary education
are uneasy. Again, we have the Board of Education desiring that
returns should be made promptly of all schools not already in
communication with the State, which, by the way, is taking paternal
action in several directions to secure a liberal education for
_all_ His Majesty’s lieges. “Pay the schoolmaster well and you
will get education” is the panacea of the moment, and so we get
in one neighbourhood a village schoolmaster with a salary of £350
and a house, and a singularly able curate, an Oxford man, with a
wife and family and no house who flourishes on £150 a year! Work,
however, is more than wages, and this exclusive stress on high
salaries is a tacit undervaluing of teachers. Most of us know of
fine educational work being done with little inducement in the way
of either pay or praise. The real drawback to a teacher’s work
and the stumbling-block in the way of a liberal education is the
monotonous drudgery of teaching continually what no one wants to
learn. Before the War, the President of the British Association
complained that education was uninteresting alike to pupils,
teachers and parents. That is why we are always learning and never
knowing, and why teachers exert themselves to invent a ‘Play Way,’
why handicrafts, ‘Eurhythmics’ and the like are offered, not as
adjuncts to, but as substitutes for, education, why our Public
Schools are exhorted to change their ways and our lesser private
schools are threatened with extinction.

And with all this the intelligence and devotion, the enthusiasm
and self-sacrificing zeal of teachers generally is amazing. They
realise that education is, not merely an interest, but a passion;
and this is true not only of the heads and the staffs of great
schools but of those hundreds of little private schools scattered
over the country.

We have all heard of “the two Miss Prettymans, who kept a girls’
school at Silverbridge. Two more benignant ladies than the Miss
Prettymans never presided over such an establishment.” As for
Miss Annabella Prettyman, the elder, “it was considered ... that
she did all the thinking, that she knew more than any other
woman in Barsetshire, and that all the Prettyman schemes for
education emanated from her mind. It was said, too, by those who
knew them best, that her sister’s good-nature was as nothing to
hers, that she was the most charitable, the most loving, the most
conscientious of schoolmistresses.” To be sure Miss Ann, the
younger sister, knew more about Roman History and Roman Law than
about current history and English Law, but what would you have?

Here was a type of school with which Trollope was familiar
generations ago, and perhaps it would not be hard to find such
another school in every ‘Silverbridge’ of to-day. To-day, however,
we are uneasy, and in our unrest produce “Joan and Peter” types
of education; that is, small schools indulge in freaks and great
schools with much reason to believe in themselves are aware of
a hitch somewhere, for they fail to turn out many boys or girls
who have intellectual interests, or have that flexibility of mind
which Matthew Arnold tells us their Academy gives to our neighbours
across the Channel. There is that bugbear of ‘Pelmanism’ urging a
charge of inadequacy against our methods; there is always some new
book by a man who brings railing accusations against his particular
school; and here is a tempered protest from Colonel Repington which
is telling:--

  “When I look back upon Eton schooling I regard it with mixed
  feelings, for I loved my five years at Eton, gloried in its
  beauties and traditions, and was in upper division when I left.
  But all the same I was conscious that Eton was not teaching me
  the things that I wanted to know, and was trying to teach me
  things that revolted me, particularly mathematics and classics. I
  wanted to learn history, geography, modern languages, literature,
  science, and political economy, and I had a very poor chance at
  Eton of obtaining anything but a smattering of any one of them. I
  do not agree that we learnt nothing or were lazy. We worked very
  hard, but at what, to my mind, were useless things, and, with my
  feet planted firmly in the ground, I resisted in a mulish way all
  attempts to teach me dead languages and higher mathematics. I
  believe that I was right. Classics have left nothing with me but
  some ideas that I could have learnt better from a crib.”

Probably the writer is mistaken as to what he owes to Eton. Without
those five years he might not have become the authority on the
theory and practice of war he is admitted to be. Who knows how much
‘Cæsar’ may have influenced him as a small boy! No doubt Public
Schools have many defects but they also have the knack of turning
out men who do the work of the world. We know about the ‘playing
fields,’ but perhaps when all is said it is the tincture of the
classics that every public schoolboy gets which makes him ‘to
differ.’ Nevertheless such protests as ‘Eton was not teaching me
the things I wanted to know’ deserve consideration.

It is easy to condemn the schools, but the fact is, a human being
is born with a desire to know much about an enormous number of
subjects. How is the school time table to get them all in or an
adequate treatment of any one of them? Then, boys (and girls too)
offer a resisting medium of extraordinary density. Every boy
‘resists in a mulish way’ attempts to teach him, not only dead
languages and higher mathematics, but literature and science and
every subject the master labours at; with the average boy a gallon
of teaching produces scarce a gill of learning, and what is the
master to do? It is something to know, however, that behind all
this ‘mulishness’ there is avidity for knowledge, not so much for
the right sort (every sort is the right sort), but put in the right
way, and we cannot say that every way is the right way.

I put before the reader what we (of the P.N.E.U.) have done towards
the solution of this educational problem with sincere diffidence,
but also with courage, because I know that no persons are more open
to conviction on reasonable grounds than are many distinguished
Headmasters and Mistresses; may they, if convinced, have the
courage of their convictions!

So little is known about the behaviour of mind that it is open to
anyone to make discoveries in this _terra incognita_. I speak, not
of psychology, of which we hear a great deal and know very little,
but of mind itself, whose ways are subtle and evasive; nevertheless
that education only is valid which has mind for its objective. The
initial difficulty is the enormous field of knowledge to which a
child ought to be introduced in right of his human nature and of
those “first born affinities” which he lives to make good. First
and chiefest is the knowledge of God, to be got at most directly
through the Bible; then comes the knowledge of man, to be got
through history, literature, art, civics, ethics, biography, the
drama, and languages; and lastly, so much knowledge of the universe
as shall explain to some extent the phenomena we are familiar with
and give a naming acquaintance at any rate with birds and flowers,
stars and stones; nor can this knowledge of the universe be carried
far in any direction without the ordering of mathematics. The
programme is immense and school life is limited. What we may call
the ‘Academic’ solution of the problem is,--teach a boy to know one
thing thoroughly, say, Greek or Chemistry or Mathematics, and you
give him the key to all knowledge. Therefore, we are told, it is
not what you know that matters, but how you learn it; and a grammar
grind, a mathematics grind or a laboratory ‘stunt,’ with a few
odd matters thrown in, is supposed to answer all the purposes of
education. The plan answers fairly well with the dozen best boys or
girls in any school, because these are so keen and intelligent that
they forage for themselves in various directions; but it does not
answer with the average pupil, and he is coming in for his share of
public attention. Shortly we shall have a new rule,--every school
must educate _every_ scholar in the three sorts of knowledge proper
to him as a human being. What is knowledge? some one will say, and
there is no pat, neatly-framed answer to be given; only this we can
assert,--Knowledge is that which we know; and the learner knows
only by a definite act of knowing which he performs for himself.
But appalling _incuria_ blocks the way. Boys and girls do not want
to know; therefore they do not know; and their future intellectual
requirements will be satisfied by bridge at night and golf by day.

It has come to us of the Parents’ Union School to discover great
avidity for knowledge in children of all ages and of every class,
together with an equally remarkable power of attention, retention,
and intellectual reaction upon the pabulum consumed. The power
which comes into play in the first place is, of course, attention,
and every child of any age, even the so-called ‘backward’ child
seems to have unlimited power of attention which acts without mark,
prize, place, praise or blame. This fact clearly recognised opens
great possibilities to the teacher; though his first impulse be
to deny statements which seem to him sweeping and absurd. But the
education of the future will probably offer us intellectual assets
in human nature as surprising as the ethical values exhibited by
the War.

We have not attained but I think we are on the way to attainment.
After over a quarter of a century of experiment on a wide scale and
consequent research, we have discovered what children are able to
know and desire to know; what their minds will act upon in the ways
of judgment and imagination; what they are incapable of knowing;
and under what conditions knowledge must be offered to them. We do
not want a ‘play-way,’ nor need we substitute arts and crafts or
eurhythmics or even ‘rugger’ and the swimming bath, as things that
boys take to, whereas learning goes against the grain. Physical
and mechanical training are necessary for the up-bringing of the
young, but let us regard them for the moment as training rather
than education,--which ought to concern itself with things of the
mind. Education as we know it is admirably designed to ‘develop
the faculties’; but if “All that’s an exploded idee,” if there
be no faculties to develop, but only mind,--alert, self-active,
discriminating, logical, capable alike of great flights and of
minute processes--we must necessarily alter our educational
tactics. Mind is benefitted by occasional gymnastics just as is
‘Brother Body,’ but cannot subsist on these any more than ‘Body’
can live on Swedish drill.

As I have said, knowledge, that is, roughly, ideas clothed upon
with facts, is the proper pabulum for mind. This food a child
requires in large quantities and in great variety. The wide
syllabus I have in view is intended in every point to meet some
particular demand of the mind, and the curious thing is that in a
syllabus embracing a score of subjects the young learner is quite
unconfused, makes no howlers, and never mixes, say, a fact of
English with a fact of French history.

Again, we have made a rather strange discovery,--that the mind
refuses to know anything except what reaches it in more or less
literary form. It is not surprising that this should be true of
children and persons accustomed to a literary atmosphere but
that it should be so of ignorant children of the slums points to
a curious fact in the behaviour of mind. Persons can ‘get up’
the driest of pulverised text-books and enough mathematics for
some public examination; but these attainments do not appear to
touch the region of mind. When we get a young Pascal who enters
voluntarily and eagerly into the study of mathematics he finds
himself in a region of high thinking and self-existent law of the
very nature of poetry; minds of this calibre assert themselves; but
this is a gift and does not come of plodding. For the general run
of scholars probably the “Association of Head Mistresses” are right
and a less exacting standard should be set for public examinations.

Of Natural Science, too, we have to learn that the way into the
secrets of nature is not through the barbed wire entanglements of
science as she is taught but through field work or other immediate
channel, illustrated and illuminated by books of literary value.

The French Academy was founded to advance _Science_ and Art, a
fact which may account for the charming lucidity and the exquisite
prose of many French books on scientific subjects. The mind is a
crucible which brings enormous power to act on what is put into it
but has no power to distil from sand and sawdust the pure essence
of ideas. So much for the manner of food which that organism (if I
may be allowed the figure) called the mind requires for its daily
subsistence. How various this sustenance must be I have already
indicated and we remember how urgently Dr. Arnold insisted on ‘very
various reading’ in the three parts of knowledge, knowledge of God,
of man, and of the universe.

But the mind was a deceiver ever. Every teacher knows how a class
will occupy itself diligently by the hour and accomplish nothing,
even though the boys think they have been reading. We all know how
ill we could stand an examination on the daily papers over which
we pore. Details fail us, we can say,--“Did you see such and such
an article?” but are not able to outline its contents. We try to
remedy this vagueness in children by making them take down, and get
up, notes of a given lesson: but we accomplish little. The mind
appears to have an outer court into which matter can be taken and
again expelled without ever having entered the inner place where
personality dwells. Here we have the secret of learning by rote,
a purely mechanical exercise of which no satisfactory account has
been given, but which leaves the patient, or pupil, unaffected.
Most teachers know the dreariness of piles of exercises into
which no stray note of personality has escaped. Now there is a
natural provision against this mere skimming of the ground by the
educational plough. Give children the sort of knowledge that they
are fitted to assimilate, served in a literary medium, and they
will pay great attention. What next? A clever _questionnaire?_
Questions, as Dr. Johnson told us, are an intrusion and a bore;
but here we have a word of ancient wisdom for our guidance; “The
mind can know nothing except what it can express in the form of
an answer to a question put by the mind to itself.” Observe, not
a question put by an outsider, but, put by the mind to itself. We
all know the trick of it. If we want to tell the substance of a
conversation, a sermon, a lecture, we ‘go over it in our minds’
first and the mind puts its question to itself, the same question
over and over again, no more than,--What next?--and lo, we have it,
the whole thing complete! We remember how one of Burke’s pamphlets,
by no means light affairs, was told almost verbatim at a College
supper. We admire such a feat and think it quite out of our reach
but it is the sort of thing that any boy or girl of fifteen could
do if allowed to read the pamphlet only once; a second reading
would be fatal because no one can give full attention to that
which he has heard before and expects to hear again. Attention
will go halt all its days if we accustom it to the crutch. We as
teachers offend deeply in this matter. We think that we shall be
heard for our much speaking and we repeat and enforce, explain
and illustrate, not altogether because we love the sound of our
own voices, but because we depreciate knowledge, we depreciate
children, and we do not understand that the mind and knowledge
are as the two members of a ball and socket joint, each of them
irrelevant without the other. ‘Education’ will have turned over a
new leaf once we realise that knowledge is to the mind as food is
to the body, without which the one faints and flags and eventually
perishes as surely as does the other.

The way to bring this panacæa into use is exceedingly simple. Let
the child (up to any age while he is an infant in the eye of the
law) tell what he has read in whole or in part on the instant, and
again, in an examination paper months later. ‘Mere verbal memory,’
some reader will say, and there is no answer to be given but that
which one must give to oneself. Let the objector read an essay of
Lamb’s, say, or of Matthew Arnold’s, _Lycidas_ or the ‘raven’
scene in _Barnaby Rudge_ and then put himself to sleep or wile
away an anxious or a dull hour by telling to himself what he has
read. The result will be disappointing; he will have forgotten this
and that turn of thought, link in the chain of argument, but he
will know the whole thing in a surprising way; the incidents, the
figures, the delicate play of thought in the author will be brought
out in his mind like the figures in the low relief which the
sculptor produces from his block. He finds he has taken in ‘mind
stuff’ which will come into use in a thousand ways perhaps as long
as he lives.

Here we get the mind forces which must act continuously in
education,--attention, assimilation, narration, retention,
reproduction. But what of reason, judgment, imagination,
discrimination, all the corps of ‘faculties’ in whose behoof the
teacher has hitherto laboured? These take care of themselves and
play as naturally and involuntarily upon the knowledge we receive
with attention and fix by narration as do the digestive organs
upon duly masticated food-stuff for the body. We must feed the
mind as the body fitly and freely; and the less we meddle with the
digestive processes in the one as in the other the more healthy the
life we shall sustain. It is an infinitely great thing, that mind
of man, present in completeness and power in even the dullest of
our pupils; even of him it may be said,--

  “Darkness may bound his Eyes, not his Imagination. In his Bed he
  may lie, like Pompey and his Sons, in all quarters of the Earth,
  may speculate the Universe, and enjoy the whole World in the
  Hermitage of Himself.”

We are paying in our education of to-day for the wave of
materialism that spread over the country a hundred years ago.
People do not take the trouble to be definitely materialistic now,
but our educational thought has received a trend which carries us
whither we would not. Any apostle of a new method is welcome to
us. We have ceased to believe in mind, and though we would not
say in so many words that “the brain secretes thought as the liver
secretes bile,” yet the physical brain rather than the spiritual
mind is our objective in education; therefore, “things are in the
saddle and ride mankind,” and we have come to believe that children
are inaccessible to ideas or any knowledge.

The message for our age is, Believe in mind, and let education go
straight as a bolt to the mind of the pupil. The use of books is a
necessary corollary, because no one is arrogant enough to believe
he can teach every subject in a full curriculum with the original
thought and exact knowledge shown by the man who has written a
book on perhaps his life-study. But the teacher is not moved by
arrogance but by a desire to be serviceable. He believes that
children cannot understand well-written books and that he must make
of himself a bridge between the pupil and the real teacher, the man
who has written the book.

Now we have proved that children, even children of the slums,
are able to understand any book suitable for their age: that is,
children of eight or nine will grasp a chapter in _Pilgrim’s
Progress_ at a single reading; children of fourteen, one of Lamb’s
Essays or a chapter in _Eöthen_, boys and girls of seventeen
will ‘tell’ _Lycidas_. Given a book of literary quality suitable
to their age and children will know how to deal with it without
elucidation. Of course they will not be able to answer questions
because questions are an impertinence which we all resent, but they
will tell you the whole thing with little touches of individual
personality in the narrative. Perhaps this is the key to the
enormous difficulty of humanistic teaching in English. We are no
longer overpowered by the mass of the ‘humanities’ confronted with
the slow process of getting a child to take in anything at all of
the author he is reading. The slow process is an invention of our
own. Let the boy read and he knows, that is, if he must tell again
what he has read.

This, of telling again, sounds very simple but it is really a
magical creative process by means of which the narrator sees what
he has conceived, so definite and so impressive is the act of
narrating that which has been read only once. I dwell on the single
reading because, let me repeat, it is impossible to fix attention
on that which we have heard before and know we shall hear again.

Treat children in this reasonable way, mind to mind; not so much
the mind of the teacher to that of the child,--that would be to
exercise undue influence--but the minds of a score of thinkers
who meet the children, mind to mind, in their several books, the
teacher performing the graceful office of presenting the one
enthusiastic mind to the other. In this way children cover an
incredible amount of ground in the time at their disposal.

Perhaps there is no better way of measuring a person of liberal
education than by the number of substantives he is able to use
with familiarity and discrimination. We remember how Scott tried
a score of openings with the man on the coach and got no further
until he hit upon ‘bent leather’; then the talk went merrily for
the man was a saddler. We have all had such experiences and know to
our shame that we ourselves have victimised interlocutors who have
not been able to find our particular ‘bent leather.’ Now, this is
a matter for teachers to consider. There are a thousand subjects
on which we should have definite knowledge and be able to speak
with intelligence; and, indeed, do we not set ‘general knowledge’
papers, with the result that boys and girls are ‘out’ for scrappy
information and provide material for comic paragraphs? There is no
remedy for this state of things but a great deal of _consecutive_
reading from very various books, all of some literary value; and
this we find can be accomplished readily in school hours because
one reading is sufficient; nor should there be any revision for
the distant examination. Here is an uncorrected list of 200 names,
used with ease and fitness in an examination on one term’s work by
a child of eleven in Form II.

  Abinadab, Athenian, Anne Boleyn, Act of Uniformity, Act of
  Supremacy, America, Austria, Alcibiades, Athens, Auckland,
  Australia, Alexandria, Alhambra.

  Bible, Bishop of Rochester, Baron, Bean-shoots, Bluff, Bowen
  Falls, Bishoprics, Blind Bay, Burano.

  Currants, Cupid, Catholic, Court of High Commission, Cranmer,
  Charles V, Colonies, Convent, Claude, Calais, Cook Strait,
  Canterbury Plain, Christchurch, Cathedral, Canals, Caliph of
  Egypt, Court of the Myrtles, Columbus, Cordova.

  David, Defender of the Faith, Duke of Guise, Dunedin, Doge’s
  Palace.

  England, Emperor, Empire, Egmont (Count), English Settlement.

  Flour, Fruits, French, Francis I, Francis of Guise, Ferdinand,
  Foveau Strait, Fuchsias, Fiords, Ferns.

  Greek, Germany, Gondolas, “Gates of the Damsels,” Gondoliers,
  Granada, Gate of Justice, Gypsies.

  Henry VIII, History, Hooper, Henry II, Hungary, Haeckel.

  Israel, Italian (language), Italy, Infusoria.

  Jesse, Jonathan, Joseph, John, Jerusalem, James, Jane Seymour.

  King of Denmark, King of Scotland, Kiwi.

  “Love-in-idleness,” Lord Chancellor, Lord Burleigh, Lord Robert
  Dudley, Lime, Lyttleton, N.Z., Lake Tango.

  Mary (The Virgin), More (Sir Thomas), Music, Martyr’s Memorial,
  Milan, Metz, Monastery, Mary, Queen of Scots, Mediterranean,
  Microscope, Messina, Middle Island, Mount Egmont, Mount Cook,
  Milford Sound, Museum, Moa, Maoris, Mussulman, Moorish King.

  Naomi, Netherlands, Nice, New Zealand, North Island, Napier,
  Nelson.

  Oberon, Oxford, Orion.

  Pharisees, Plants, Parliament, Puck, Pope, Protestant, Poetry,
  Philosophy, “_Paix des Dames_,” Philip II, Paris, Planets, “Pink
  Terraces,” Piazetta, Philip of Burgundy.

  Queen Catherine, Queen Elizabeth, Queen Mary, Queen Isabella,
  Queen Juana.

  Ruth, Robin Goodfellow, Ridley, Reformation, Radiolaria,
  Rotomaliana (Lake), Rea.

  Saul, Samuel, Simeon, Simon Peter, Sunshine, Sugar-cane, Spices,
  Sultan, Spain, St. Quentin, Socrates, Stars, Sycamore, Seed-ball,
  Stewart Island, Seaports, Southern Alps, Scotch Settlement, St.
  Mark, St. Theodore, St. Maria Formosa (Church), Sierra Navada.

  Temple, Titania, Testament, Treaty, Turks, Toul, Thread Slime,
  Tree Ferns, Timber Trees, Trieste, Toledo.

  Verdure, Venus (Planet), Volcano, Volcanic Action, Venice.

  Wheat, Wiltshire, William Cecil, Walsingham, Winged Seed,
  Wellington, Waikato.

  Zaccharias, Zebedee.

The fitness and simplicity with which these substantives are
employed is evidenced in the complete sets of papers that
follow.[46]

Supposing we have succeeded in shifting a conscientious and
intelligent teacher from one mental position to another, suppose
that he give up the notion of developing ‘faculties’ because he
perceives that mind is complete and sufficient and wants nothing
but its proper pabulum; that, again, he yield his place as the
medium of all knowledge because his boys are qualified to deal with
knowledge at first hand from the right books; suppose he scrap all
the text-books and compendiums he has in use, perceiving that only
that curious outsider, the verbal memory, and not the mind, will
consent to deal with these dry-as-dust compilations; suppose he
concede that much knowledge of various sorts and therefore a wide
curriculum is necessary for the production of an intelligent and
magnanimous citizen; supposing he has proved that any boy can face
such a curriculum because all boys have immense power of attention
and are able to know their work after a single reading,--surely
he has still one or two strongholds that have not been attacked!
What he aims at, he will tell you, is, not to open avenues of
approach to the subjects about which intelligent citizens should
know something, but to give pretty thorough knowledge in two or
three directions and to turn out straight Englishmen; that is,
he looks upon school as a nursery for the formation of character
rather than for the acquisition of knowledge. As for the one or two
subjects, practically, classics and mathematics, I have nothing
to say; those subjects are of real value and also under existing
regulations pretty high attainments in them are necessary as a
preliminary to professional advancement. It is possible that when
a boy has the habit of covering the ground rapidly he may get more
into the given ‘period’ and leave a margin for the wider range
of subjects proper to a liberal education. Experiments in this
direction are being tried in one of our great Grammar Schools,
and how important such experiments are to us as a democracy, I
need not be at pains to show. There is every promise that the
‘masses’ will learn to read in their schools in such wise as to
produce in a terminal examination as considerable a list of names
as those on the preceding page. If the masses know ‘Sancho Panza,’
Elsinore, ‘Excalibur,’ ‘Rosinante,’ ‘Mrs. Jellaby,’ redstart,
‘Bevis,’ bogbean,--the classes must know these things too with
easy intimacy. If the one class is familiar with the pictures of
the Van Eycks, with ‘Comus,’ ‘Duessa,’ ‘Baron of Bradwardine,’ the
other class must know them too, and be able to use the knowledge
with such effect as does the ‘Honourable Member’ when he quotes a
familiar tag from Horace. He touches a spring to which all hearts
rise, because allusions to what we know are like the light on ‘old
familiar faces.’ What we want is a common basis of thought, such
a ground work as we get from having read the same books, grown
familiar with the same pictures, the same musical compositions, the
same interests; when we have such a fundamental basis, we shall be
able to speak to each other whether in public speaking or common
talk; we shall “all hear ... in our own tongue the wonderful works
of God” because we have learned a common speech through those who
in their books have lived to educate the race. And how persuasively
shall we speak to those who know, and therefore do not present the
dead front of opposition--the natural resource of ignorance!

A democratic education must have new features. We must all be able
to ‘take the front’ of men and women by speaking of that which
they have known and felt and already found joy in. So shall we
cease to present motives of self interest and personal advantage as
incentives to public action; we shall touch springs of poetry, of
heroism, to which all natures have the habit of rising; and thus
shall we build “Jerusalem in England’s green and pleasant land.”
Towards this, we must have read the same books, only in English
rather than in Latin or Greek, because the people will probably
never have time to attain proficiency in these; neither, as a
matter of fact, has the average boy at our great schools. If we
must still have an exclusive education to which only the few best
in a school can attain,--and it seems to me that we must, that this
is, in fact, the one thing we have achieved, an education that has
accomplished great results in character and conduct;--but if we
would keep this possession, we must at the same time broaden its
base and narrow its bounds. We must give wide reading in the lower
forms, reading that everybody has read, and we must so compress
our classical and mathematical work in the higher Forms that much
history and ‘English’ may be included. I speak without authority
but is it not true that there is overlapping in the passage from
Preparatory to Public School, from one Form to a higher, from the
Sixth to the University? Probably it will be found possible to give
the old training which has produced such notable results, but to
make it an inclusive not an exclusive education, to take in the
books which everyone should know, the pictures everyone should be
familiar with, the history, the travel, in which we should all be
at home, some understanding of the phenomena which come before us
all. Once we give up the notion that education is a development
of the ‘faculties’ to be accomplished by the teacher, and realize
that it is on the contrary an appropriation of wide knowledge
which the pupil must get for himself, there is some fear that the
old exclusive education must go by the board; but this would be a
national calamity. We must keep that to which we have attained and
add to it the wide reading of a liberal education. The careers of
‘Joan’ and ‘Peter,’ as depicted by Mr. Wells are instructive. Peter
is not entered for a recognised Public School for his guardian
had many things against such schools, but games are his chief
concern. Later we find the two at College, and of Joan it is said,
“No religion has convinced her of a purpose in her life, neither
Highmorton nor Cambridge has suggested any mundane devotion to
her nor pointed her ambitions to a career. The only career these
feminine schools and Colleges recognized was a career of academic
success and teaching.” The implicit charge against the schools is
that they try each in its own way to find a substitute for the
saving grace of knowledge. Academic success and knowledge are not
the same thing and many excellent schools fail to give their pupils
delight in the latter for its own sake or to bring them in touch
with the sort of knowledge that influences character and conduct.
The slow, imperceptible, sinking-in of high ideals is the gain that
a good school should yield its pupils.

We have, if not a higher, yet another standard which it may be
interesting to consider. We offer children knowledge for its own
sake and our pupils discover that ‘studies serve for delight.’ We
do not give our best attention to brilliant children, it is not
necessary; these work well on their own account and so do the
average and even the dull pupils. Historical characters become
real to them and a fairly wide historical field comes under their
purview; they do not grow up in crass ignorance of the history
of foreign countries; they understand, for example, the India of
to-day the better because they have some slight intimacy with Akbar
as a contemporary of Elizabeth. They take to themselves a lesson
from the youthful presumption of ‘Phaëton’; ‘Midas’ and ‘Circe,’
Xerxes and Pericles enrich the background of their thoughts. The
several Forms get through a great deal of reading because we
have discovered that a single reading suffices to secure a clear
knowledge (as far as it goes) of a subject, given the right book.
Therefore, many books are necessary, and each is read consecutively
so that the knowledge acquired is not scrappy and insecure. I know
that teachers enjoy the work set term by term fully as much as
do the children and that a schoolroom life in which there is no
monotony, no dulness, little or no idleness or inattention, does
away with the necessity to make games the paramount interest of the
school--to make them indeed a stem necessity rather than a joyous
relaxation.

The introduction of the methods I advocate has a curious effect
on a whole family. The old nurse and the gardener are told of the
adventures of ‘Waverley.’ “A. B. has named a moss her father picked
on the tip-top of Ben Lawers. It is very rare and only grows on
Ben Lawers and one other mountain. She is so pleased,” and so, no
doubt, is her father! The whole household thinks of and figures to
itself great things, for nothing is so catching as knowledge and
that fine temper of mind that knowledge brings with it. Children so
taught are delightful companions because they have large interests
and worthy thoughts; they have much to talk about and such casual
talk benefits society. The fine sense, like an atmosphere, of
things worth knowing and worth living for, this it is which
produces magnanimous citizens, and we feel that Milton was right in
claiming magnanimity as the proper outcome of education.

When we compare the large number of books, of historical and
literary personages, the range of natural phenomena, with which
children brought up on these lines are acquainted, with the sterile
syllabus, not very well mastered, which is the schoolboy’s normal
fare, we find matter for reflection. Yet I suppose that in few
things is the general moral and intellectual progress evidenced
more than in the culture common among the teachers of secondary
schools. Every Head knows how to draw up the best possible syllabus
and to secure good work, if upon narrow lines, but we (of the
P.N.E.U.) work at an advantage when, as I have said, we recognise
one or two natural laws.

I have no doubt that some of my readers are interested in the work
we are doing in Elementary schools,--a work the more astonishing
because children who have little vocabulary to begin with, no trace
of literary background, show themselves able to hear or read a
work of literary value and after a single reading to narrate pages
with spirit and accuracy, not hedging at the longest names nor
muddling complicated statements. This was a revelation to us, and
it signifies that a literary education is open to all, not after
tedious and laborious preparation, but immediately. The people wait
only for the right books to be put into their hands and the right
method to be employed.

Let me repeat that we live in times critical for everybody, but
eminently critical for teachers, because it rests with them whether
personal or general good shall be aimed at, whether education
shall be merely a means of getting on, or a means of general
progress towards high thinking and plain living, and therefore an
instrument of the greatest national good.

Let me beg that Heads of schools, so far in sympathy with me that
they perceive we are at the parting of the ways, will consider a
method which brings promise of relief.

We are in a condition, for example, to answer the questions to be
considered by the Departmental Committee on English:--

  “Can history and literature be brought into closer relations
  with the school curriculum than is the case at present? How much
  grammar is necessary? Could not oral composition and drama and
  debate, do something to cure our national _aphasia_? How can the
  preparatory schools improve their English teaching? How can the
  school essay be redeemed from barrenness? How can examinations be
  made a test of English without destroying the love of literature?”

These questions might have been framed with a view to bring out
the attainments of the Parents’ Union School. History, European
as well as English, runs in harness with literature. Some Syntax
is necessary and a good deal of what may be called historical
Grammar, but, not in order to teach the art of correct writing and
speaking; this is a native art, and the beautiful consecutive and
eloquent speech of young scholars in narrating what they have read
is a thing to be listened to not without envy. As to _aphasia_, to
quote a Director of Education on this subject,--“Conversational
readiness becomes a characteristic. A quarter of a century of these
methods with all the children of England and the strong silent
Englishman should be a rare bird!” A schoolmaster remarks that his
big boys are now eager to speak at some length--a thing new in his
experience. Consider what an asset this should be to a country
whose safety will depend more and more upon the power in the middle
classes of clear and conclusive speech. Oral composition is the
habit of the school from the age of six to eighteen. “Children of
ten who read Shakespeare” is the heading of an article in a local
newspaper which sent a reporter to investigate the P.N.E.U. method
at work in a school as the result of an article in the _Nineteenth
Century and After_ written by the Headmaster. As for preparatory
schools, we can do no more than offer them a method the results of
which in teaching English are rather surprising. The final question
as to how examinations may be made a source of intellectual
profit is I think sufficiently answered in the P.U.S. children’s
examination papers.

We do not invite Heads of schools to take up work lightly, which
implies a sound knowledge of certain principles and as faithful a
practice. The easy tolerance which holds smilingly that everything
is as good as everything else, that one educational doctrine
is as good as another, that, in fact, a mixture of all such
doctrines gives pretty safe results,--this sort of complacent
attitude produces lukewarm effort and disappointing progress. I
feel strongly that to attempt to work this method without a firm
adherence to the few principles laid down would be not only idle
but disastrous. “Oh, we could do anything with books like those,”
said a master; he tried the books and failed conspicuously because
he ignored the principles. We teachers are really modest and
diffident and are not prepared to say that we are more capable of
handling a subject than is a carefully chosen author who writes
especially upon that subject. “Yes, but,” says a young and able
teacher, “we know better how to reach the minds of children than
does the most eloquent author speaking through the dull pages of a
book.” This is a contention of which we have finally disposed. We
have shown that the mass of knowledge, evoking vivid imagination
and sound judgment, acquired in a term from the proper books, is
many times as great, many times more thoroughly visualised by the
scholars, than had they waited upon the words of the most able and
effective teacher. This is why we insist upon the use of books.
It is not that teachers are not eminently capable but because
information does not become knowledge unless a child perform the
‘act of knowing’ without the intervention of another personality.

Heads of schools are a generous folk and perhaps they have some
reason to think parents are niggardly, but the provision of the
necessary books by the parents is a _sine quâ non_. It is our part
to see to it that books take root in the homes of our scholars
and we must make parents understand that it is impossible to give
a liberal education to children who have not a due provision of
very various books. Moreover, it is impossible to teach children
to spell when they do not read for themselves; we hear complaints
of the difficulties of spelling, of the necessity to do violence
to the language which is dear to us all in order to make ‘spelling
made easy’; but in thousands of cases that come before us we
find that children who use their books for themselves spell well
because they visualise the words they read. Those who merely
listen to their teacher have no guide (in English at any rate)
to the spelling of the words they hear. We are, perhaps, opposed
to oral lessons or lectures except by way of occasional review
or introduction. For actual education children must do their own
work out of their own books under the sympathetic guidance of
an intelligent teacher. We find, I may add, that once parents
recognise how necessary a considerable supply of books is, they
make no difficulty about getting those set in our programmes. Mr.
Fisher says,--“there are books and text-books,” and the day is at
hand when we shall all see that the latter are of no educational
value. We rarely use text-books in the Parents’ Union School but
confine ourselves as far as possible to works with the imaginative
grasp, the touch of originality, which distinguish a book from a
text-book. Perhaps we should apologise for ourselves as purveyors
not precisely of books but of lists of books. Every headmaster or
mistress is able to draw up such lists, but think of the labour
of keeping some 170 books in circulation with a number of changes
every term! Here is our excuse for offering our services to
much-occupied teachers. There has been talk from time to time about
interfering with the liberty of teachers to choose their own books,
but one might as well contend for everyman’s liberty to make his
own boots! It is one of those questions of the division of labour
which belong to our civilisation; and if the question of liberty be
raised at all, why should we not go further and let the children
choose their books? But we know very well that the liberty we
worship is an elusive goddess and that we do not find it convenient
to do all those things we are at liberty to do.

The terminal examinations are of great importance. They are not
merely and chiefly tests of knowledge but records which are
likely to be permanent. There are things which every child must
know, every child, for the days have gone by when ‘the education
befitting a gentleman’ was our aim.

The knowledge of God is the principal knowledge, and no teaching
of the Bible which does not further that knowledge is of religious
value. Therefore the children read, or if they are too young to
read for themselves the teacher reads to them, a passage of varying
length covering an incident or some definite teaching. If there
are remarks to be made about local geography or local custom, the
teacher makes them before the passage has been read, emphasizing
briefly but reverently any spiritual or moral truth; the children
narrate what has been read after the reading; they do this with
curious accuracy and yet with some originality, conveying the
spiritual teaching which the teacher has indicated. Now this is
no parrot-exercise, but is the result of such an assimilation of
the passage that it has become a part of the young scholar. It is
only by trying the method oneself on such an incident, for example,
as the visit of Nicodemus or the talk with the woman of Samaria,
that we realise the wonderful clearness with which each incident
is brought out, the fullness of meaning with which every phrase
is invested by such personal effort. This method of teaching is
especially valuable in dealing with the Gospel history, but none
of us who read during the War the daily lessons appointed by the
Church could fail to be struck by the fact that the law and the
prophets still interpret the ways of God, and we shall not do well
if we tacitly treat the Old Testament as out-of-date as a guide to
life.

Next in order to religious knowledge, history is the pivot upon
which our curriculum turns. History is the rich pasture of the
mind--which increases upon the knowledge of men and events and,
more than all, upon the sense of nationhood, the proper corrective
of the intolerable individualism of modern education. Let Amyot
tell us,--

  “How greatly is the reading of histories to be esteemed, which
  is able to furnish us with more examples in one day, than the
  whole course of the longest life of any man is able to do.
  Insomuch that they which exercise themselves in reading as they
  ought to do, although they be but young, become such in respect
  of understanding of the affairs of this world, as if they were
  old and grayheaded and of long experience. Yea, though they
  never have removed out of their houses, yet are they advertised,
  informed and satisfied of all things in the world.”

Hence, the great value of the Old Testament,--history and poetry,
the law and the prophets; and perhaps no one was more sensible of
this educative value of the Scriptures than Goethe, though he was
little sensible of their more spiritual worth. We endeavour to
bring records contemporary with the Bible before children, using
the contents of certain Rooms of the British Museum as a basis.
Episodes of Greek and Roman history come in, partly for their
historical, partly for their distinctly ethical value. Plutarch is,
of course, our great authority.

  “(Plutarch) hath written the profitable story of all authors.
  For all other were fain to take their matter, as the fortune of
  the countries whereof they wrote fell out: But this man being
  excellent in wit, learning, and experience, hath chosen the
  special acts of the best persons, of the famousest nations of the
  world.” (_North_).

English History is always with us, but only in the earliest years
is it studied alone. It is not, as we know, possible always to
get the ideal book, so we use the best we can find and supplement
with historical essays of literary value. Literature is hardly
a distinct subject, so closely is it associated with history,
whether general or English; and whether it be contemporary or
merely illustrative; and it is astonishing how much sound learning
children acquire when the thought of an age is made to synchronise
with its political and social developments. A point which I
should like to bring before the reader is the peculiar part which
poetry plays in making us aware of this thought of the ages,
including our own. Every age, every epoch, has its poetic aspect,
its quintessence, as it were, and happy the people who have a
Shakespeare, a Dante, a Milton, a Burns, to gather up and preserve
its meaning as a world possession.

Let me repeat that what is called ‘composition’ is an inevitable
consequence of this free yet exact use of books and requires no
special attention until the pupil is old enough to take naturally
a critical interest in the use of words. Civics takes place as a
separate subject, but it is so closely bound up with literature and
history on the one hand and with ethics, or, what we call everyday
morals, on the other, that the division of subjects is only
nominal.

We have considered in a previous chapter[47] what we do for
children as inhabitants of a world ordered by natural law. Here we
have a contention with some teachers of science who maintain that a
child can only learn what he discovers for himself _de novo_. The
theory is plausible, but the practice is disappointingly narrow and
inexpansive. The teacher has got his knowledge through books; why
then are they taboo for the children? Probably the reason is that
text-books of science are dessicated to the last degree, so the
teacher hopes to make up for their dryness by familiar talk about
the Hydra, for example, as a creature capable of close friendships,
about the sea-anemone as a ‘Granny’ of enormous longevity; that is,
the interest of the subject is made to depend upon side issues.
The French scientists know better; they perceive that as there
is an essence of history which is poetry so there is an essence
of science to be expressed in exquisite prose. We have a few
books of this character in English and we use them in the P.U.S.
in conjunction with field work and drawing--a great promoter of
enthusiasm for nature.

I have already shown[47] what we do, for example, in the way of
affording children familiar acquaintance with great music and
great pictures. An eminent art-dealer in London paid us a pretty
compliment when he said,--“Lord help the children!” were our work
to come to an end; and he had reason for he had just sold to P.U.S.
children thousands of little exquisite reproductions of certain
pictures by Velasquez which were the study of the term; no wonder
that a man who loves art and believes in it should feel that
something worth while was being done. In drawing, the scholars work
very freely in colour from natural figures and objects and draw
scenes visualised in the term’s reading. We do not teach drawing as
a means of self-expression; the scholars express, not themselves,
but what they can see and what they conceive.

I have already gone into the teaching of languages; the habit of
fixed attention and ready narration which the P.U.S. pupils acquire
should be of value in this branch of work, and I believe a new era
is opening for us and we English will at last become linguists. At
the House of Education the students narrate in French,[48]--more
readily and copiously than they do in English,--the courses of
lectures in French history and literature which form part of
their work. In German and Italian they are able to read a scene
in a play and ‘tell’ the scene in character, or a short passage
from a narrative. We rather emphasise Italian, the language is so
beautiful and the literature so rich, and I should like to suggest
that schools should do the same. Latin and Greek we learn in the
usual ways, but we apply the method of narration to the former.

I must commend any further study of the _rationale_ of our syllabus
to the reader’s own kind consideration; he will perceive that
we have a principle of correlation in things essential, but no
fatiguing practice of it in detail. But to one more statement, a
very daring one, I beg for favourable attention. The common theory
and practice of education are on trial. It is idle to ‘develop
the faculties’ if there be no faculties, but only _mind_, which,
like Wordsworth’s cloud, moves altogether when it moves at all.
Therefore, those subjects whose _raison d’être_ is to develop this
and the other faculty are practically out of court and we must seek
another basis for education. Subjects of instruction which would be
valuable if reason, judgment, imagination, had to be ‘developed’
become as meretricious, as much ‘accomplishments,’ as those early
Victorian accomplishments over which we make merry. Education must
be in touch with life. We must learn what we _desire to know_.
Nobody talks to his friend about ‘stinks,’ about the niceties of
Greek accents, nor, unless the two be mathematicians, about surds.
But, when Jupiter is regnant, how good to tell and to learn! What
a welcome companion is he who can distinguish between songs that
differ in the vespers of the birds! How grateful the company of the
reader of history who brings forward parallels to episodes in the
great War! We are apt to work for one thing in the hope that we
shall get another and a very different thing; we don’t. If we work
for public examinations, the questions in which must be of a narrow
academic cast, we get a narrow, accurate, somewhat sterile type of
mind. We reap as we have sown.

The future of England depends largely upon Secondary schools;
let the Heads of these lay out a liberal field of study and
astonishingly fair things will grow in that garden of mind in which
we are invited to sow the seeds of all knowledge. My bold proposal
is that the Heads of Secondary Schools from the least to the
greatest should adopt a scheme of work following the lines I have
indicated, _faute de mieux_, that of the Parents’ Union School, and
that they should do this for the nation’s sake.

Mr. Masefield remarks,--

  “There can be no great art without great fable. Great art can
  only exist where great men brood intensely on something upon
  which all men brood a little. Without a popular body of fable
  there can be no unselfish art in any country. Shakespeare’s art
  was selfish till he turned to the great tales in the four most
  popular books of his time, Holinshed, North’s Plutarch, Cinthio
  and De Belleforest. Since the newspaper became powerful, topic
  has supplanted fable and subject comes to the artist untrimmed
  and unlit by the vitality of many minds.”

It is this vitality of many minds that we aim at securing and
entreat educational workers and thinkers to join in forming a
common body of thought which shall make England great in art no
doubt, and also great in life.

This is the way to make great men and not by petty efforts to form
character in this direction or in that. Let us take it to ourselves
that great character comes out of great thoughts, and that great
thought must be initiated by great thinkers; then we shall have a
definite aim in education. Thinking and not doing is the source of
character.

  (Here followed a set of examination answers in each form. Space
  forbids their inclusion but specimen sets can be seen at the
  P.N.E.U. Office.)




CHAPTER III

THE SCOPE OF CONTINUATION SCHOOLS


A hundred years ago, about the close of the Napoleonic wars, there
was such another stirring among the dry bones as we are aware of
to-day. All the world knew then, as now, that war was the outcome
of the wrong thinking of ignorance, and that education was the
nostrum for minds diseased.

Prussia led the way; not the children but the young people were
the immediate concern of Statesmen, and, guided by the philosophy
of Fichte, and organised under the statesmanship of Stein, that
noble league of youth, the Tugendbund, came into being. Prussia
was miserably impoverished, but her concern was not with the arts
which should make her rich; her young people looked to philosophic
principles for precept and to history for example, and, it was well
with the land.

Not only in Prussia but throughout western Europe there was a more
or less active intellectual renaissance, but, whether because the
times were not ripe or the peoples were not worthy, the high ideals
of the early days of the century were superseded by the utilitarian
motive.

When the ‘Continuation School’ movement revived, envy of the
commercial and manufacturing successes of England actuated the new
effort; and already in 1829 a Bavarian statesman had announced
that if you would have the fruit you must sow the seed, that is,
manufacturing success is to be had only at the cost of technical
education.

We all know the result in the great Munich schools where first-rate
organisation and admirable teaching have produced an appreciable
effect upon German industries. But the best German minds have long
been aware that “an education which has powerful economic interests
behind it is apt to become too narrowly utilitarian in motive and
to lose that ideal element which gives all education its chief
power over character.” As Mr. Lecky has said concerning morals,
“the Utilitarian theory is profoundly immoral.”

The occasion brought forth the man; we know how in 1900 Dr.
Kirschensteiner chanced to see the announcement of a prize offered
for an essay on the best way of training youth. He wrote the essay,
was crowned by the Academy of his country, and that essay in
pamphlet form has influenced opinion and directed action throughout
the west: Professors Dewey and Stanley Hall in the United States,
Dr. Armstrong and Sir Philip Magnus at home, are among its leading
exponents.

And what was the note of this new gospel of education? Practically
that same note which had proceeded from England, France,
Switzerland, a century earlier: a utilitarian education should be
universal and compulsory; child and adolescent should be “saturated
with the spirit of service, provided with the instruments of
effective self-direction.” Behold, Utopia at hand! every young
person fitted, body and soul, for the uses of society; as for his
own uses, what he should be in and for himself--why, what matter?

It is not that the eminent educationalists I have referred to
would willingly sacrifice the individual youth to society; on the
contrary they would raise him, give him place and power, give him
opportunity; place his feet on the rungs of that ladder we used to
hear about; but we have all been misled by mistaken views as to
the function of education. We have believed that knowledge may be
derived from sensation, that what we have seen with our eyes and
our hands have handled affords us the nutriment our souls demand.
No doubt a boy uses his mind to some purpose when he makes, for
example, an ingenious model; and, seeing mind at work, we run away
with the notion that food and work are synonymous terms; for the
body they may be so in a certain sense, for work brings pay and pay
buys food, but no such indirect transaction is possible to mind;
a mind perpetually at heavy work is a sort of intellectual navvy,
whose food must be proportioned to his labour. Our great statesmen,
Gladstone, Lord Salisbury and others, knew this, and their wide and
deep reading in other matters than politics should not occasion
surprise.

The War has forced new ideas upon us; we begin, for instance, to
realise the avidity of the _adult_ mind for instruction; it was
startling to read of 1,500 soldier candidates for twenty vacant
places in a certain class. We begin to see that mind, the mind of
all sorts and conditions of men, requires its rations, wholesome
and regularly served. As things are we shall have to see to it
that everybody gets fed; but our hope is that henceforth we shall
bring up our young people with self-sustaining minds, as well
as self-sustaining bodies, by a due ordering of the process of
education. We hope so to awaken and direct mind hunger that every
man’s mind will look after itself.

What is the proper food of mind, has already been discussed but
we may assume that education should make our boys and girls rich
towards God (we remember the fool of the parable who failed because
he was _not_ “rich towards God”), rich towards society and rich
towards themselves. I will not press my point by urging the moral
bankruptcy which has been exposed to us during recent years as
co-existent with, if not caused by, utilitarian education; for
the catastrophe has been accelerated by the sort of moral madness
of which we too have had our seasons in the past,--witness our
_Barnaby Rudge_ and _Peveril of the Peak_ episodes; we have indeed
been carried off our feet by a fallacious notion once and again,
but our national insanity has on each occasion been short-lived
because our education hitherto has not taught us to believe a lie.

We are not worse than others, and if we think well of ourselves
as a nation, why, national pride and personal modesty do not go
ill together; in peace-time we have bitter things to say of our
British working-man, but all the same he compares favourably with
the somewhat sardonic Latin, the sullen Teuton, whom we all know.
And the better man does the better work. We have heard much of
German efficiency, and perhaps the German excels in little matters
like doors that shut, blinds that draw, springs that act, things of
domestic utility important in a country with a more extreme climate
than ours; but these are little matters and perhaps our failing is,
not to do our best except on big occasions; give us a big job or a
big war and we show our mettle.

But probably in all our considerable industries we excel. German
women will purr over the material of our dresses with “Ach,
englisches Tuch!” Well dressed men are English tailored in English
cloths. We buy, or bought, things “made in Germany” because they
were cheap, but the most costly and most desired goods in German
shops are advertised as “englisch.”

This is a point to be borne in mind in considering the education of
adolescents. We are given to depreciating ourselves and each other,
but in fact we have no lee-way to make up; as both a manufacturing
and commercial nation we are well in the van and are without
inducement to sell the people’s birthright for a mess of pottage.

Before I come to the point I desire to make, let us consider
whether the problem of Continuation Schools has been attacked
anywhere more successfully than in those countries of Middle
Europe. Some of them, Germany especially, have done all that
is to be done in response to the cry for efficiency with its
resultant big returns and high wages; but from the beginning of the
Continuation School movement in, say, 1806, the four north-western
countries have worked towards different ends. In Denmark they have,
not Continuation Schools, but People’s High Schools, a pleasanter
name for possibly a pleasanter thing.

Denmark, like Germany, was, as we know, devastated by the
Napoleonic wars, but had been vitalised by the liberation of its
serfs in 1788, and this prepared the ground for Grundtvig, that
poet, historian and enthusiast, who became the “Father of the
People’s High Schools.”

“Where there is most life, there is the victory,” said he, and
the immediate way to an access of life he saw in “A Danish High
School accessible to young people all over the land,” a school
which should inspire “admiration for what is great, love for what
is beautiful, faithfulness and affection, peace and unity, innocent
cheerfulness, pleasure and mirth.” Observe, there is no word of
‘efficiency’ in this poet’s dream, but he did assure Charles VIII
that with such a school, “a well of healing in the land,” he might
afford to smile at the newspapers, whether they chose to praise or
blame. The King gave heed, begged for a further development of his
plans than was afforded in the original pamphlet, and by 1845 the
schools he had dreamed of began to be.

We cannot follow the development of these Danish People’s Schools,
but in 1903-4 their pupils numbered over three thousand men and
rather more women, and wise men cherished the hope that “the new
Danish school for youth is to have the good fortune to blend all
classes of the people into one.”

All of these High Schools bear the mark of the genius of their
“Father”--whose pupils have known how to sum up his teaching in
three sayings,--“Spirit is might; Spirit reveals itself in spirit;
Spirit works only in freedom.” We are able to trace the source of
these sayings, and indeed this movement seems to have been from
the first profoundly Christian--Christian in no narrow sense,
but sharing the wide liberality of that _Allegoria filosofica
della Religione Cattolica_ conceived by the ‘Angelic Doctor’ and
pictured by Simone Memmi on the walls of the Spanish chapel in
Santa Maria Novella (Florence): the several teachers commemorated
were themselves illustrious pagans but not therefore the less under
Divine teaching. Here, it seems to me, is an educational _credo_
worth reviving in these utilitarian days, and some such creed seems
to have been Grundtvig’s, though probably independently conceived.
His great hope is that “above all, some acquaintance with popular
literature, especially with the poetry and history of one’s own
country, will create a brand new world of readers all over the
land.”

I cannot go into the question of the Agricultural Schools of which
it is said that “the Danish Agricultural School is the child of the
Danish Folkshöjskole, and must, like this, have Christian faith and
national life for its basis.” In the careless days before the War
we could all testify to the excellence of Danish butter, but did we
consider the “resolution and capacity” with which Danish peasants
passed over from the making of poor butter in their various small
holdings to the “manufacture in co-operative dairies of butter of
an almost uniform fineness”? This, too, says an eminent Swedish
Professor, is due to the High Schools, for, said he, “Just as the
enrichment of the soil gives the best conditions for the seeds
sown in it, so a well-grounded humanistic training provides the
surest basis for business capacity, and not the least so in the
case of the coming farmers.”[49] These are weighty words deserving
our consideration at a moment when we, too, are on the eve of a new
departure.

The three neighbouring countries watched the experiments in Denmark
with keen interest, and almost simultaneously People’s High Schools
sprang up in all four.

These northern High Schools, necessarily winter schools, were not
open at the time of my visit, but two or three things casually
observed might, I think, be traced to their influence. For
instance, Copenhagen itself, as compared with Munich, strikes one
as a city with a soul. At the Hague, again, I saw an artisan in
his working clothes shewing pictures in one of the galleries to
his boy of seven who looked earnestly and listened eagerly. The
young people in the great Delft porcelain works shewed traces of
culture and gentleness in countenance and manner. But nothing
struck me more than what I saw in the general shop of an out of
the way village in Sweden; the villagers were peasants and the one
shop sold cabbages and herrings, cheese and calico; but across the
small-paned window was a shelf closely packed with volumes in paper
covers which had not had time to get dusty; of course I could not
read all the titles, but among them were translations from French,
German and English. I noticed slim volumes of Scott, Dickens,
Thackeray, Ruskin, Carlyle and the last thing out. One felt assured
that the village was in ‘kingdom come,’ that of a long winter’s
evening, in any home, one read aloud whilst the rest worked, that
there was much to talk about when friends met and lovers walked.
(How sad, by the way, to read that ‘Tommy,’ whom we all love and
revere, is quick to form friendships but that these do not progress
for the friends have nothing to talk about.) Think of little plays
got up, of public readings given by the villagers themselves; might
such things be with us, the lure of the town would cease to draw
our village men and maids, for the village that can offer a happy
community life, sustained by the people themselves, is able to hold
its people.

Our upper and middle classes, professional and other, are
singularly stable folk, and they are so, not because of their
material but of their intellectual well-being; in this sense only
they are most of them the ‘Haves’ as compared with the ‘Have-nots.’
The reason is not far to seek. Are there not agitators abroad whose
business it is to sow seeds of discontent in the gaping minds of
the multitude? The full mind passes on, but that which is empty
seizes on _any_ new notion with avidity, and is hardly to be blamed
for doing so; a hungry mind takes what it can get, and the baker is
apt to be lenient about prosecuting the starving man who steals a
loaf. I do not hesitate to say that the constantly recurring misery
of our age, ‘Labour Unrest,’ is to be laid at the door, not of the
working man, but of the nation which has not troubled itself to
consider the natural hunger of mind and the manner of meat such
hunger demands.

I have tried to establish that the Kultur offered by the Munich
type of Continuation School has had no good effect upon morals or
manners and no conspicuously good effect upon manufactures.

That England is under no necessity to follow Germany’s lead in this
matter for Germany allows our superiority by paying a high price
for our goods.

That Denmark and the neighbouring states, on the contrary, excel in
those things in which we fall short.

That the People’s High Schools of Denmark are worthier of our
imitation than the Continuation Schools of Germany.

That they are so because character and conduct, intelligence and
initiative, are the outcome of a humanistic education in which the
knowledge of God is put first.

But we cannot take educational prescriptions designed for another
patient; the Grundtvig Schools are for students ranging from
eighteen to twenty-five, not for the more difficult ages from
fourteen to eighteen. Again, these People’s High Schools are
residential. In countries so largely agricultural it is possible
for a great part of the young adult population to spend the five
winter months year by year at one of these People’s High Schools.
Their case and ours do not go on all fours. Our problem is the
young adolescent in a country largely manufacturing.

Now, we have received our cloth, and not in ungenerous measure.
How shall we cut our coat, that is, how shall we spend those seven
or eight hours a week in which “Education” is to do her part
for the young citizen? If we take the easiest way, we shall let
the boy do what he is doing for the rest of the week,--work for
his employer, whether directly, by way of increased output, or
indirectly, by way of increased skill. This would be a betrayal. No
employer wishes to take with one hand what he gives with the other;
besides, what employer doubts the ability of his staff to train his
young employees? Again, the technique of any employment takes but
little time to understand. It is the practice that is of value,
and such practice is--work. Continuation Schools should not exist
for technical instruction; they are established definitely for the
sort of education of which such instruction forms no part; and will
not the evening hours be free as they are at present for technical
classes, gymnastic clubs, and various forms of recreative exercise?

This particular gift of _time_ must be dedicated to things of the
mind if we believe that mind too requires its rations and that to
use the mind is by no means the same thing as to feed it.

With the best will in the world to give boys and girls something
on which to chew the cud, real mind-stuff for digestion and
assimilation, we find that the flood-gates are opened; an ocean of
things good to know overwhelms us and we have--eight hours a week!
We seize on that blessed word compromise and see two possibilities:
we are in a hurry to make good citizens. Now, good citizens must
have sound opinions about law, duty, work, wages, what not; so we
pour opinions into the young people from the lips of lecturer or
teacher, his opinions, which they are intended to take as theirs.
In the next place there is so much to be learned that a selection
must needs be made; the teacher makes this selection and the young
people are “poured into like a bucket,” which, says Carlyle, “is
not exhilarating to any soul.” Some ground is covered; teachers and
Education Authorities are satisfied; and if, when the time comes,
the young people leave school discontented and uneasy, if their
work bore them and their leisure bore them, if their pleasures are
mean and meagre, and if they become men and women rather eager
than otherwise for the excitement of a strike, that is because the
Continuation, as the Elementary, School will have failed to find
them.

This is the real educational difficulty in schools for all classes,
for pupils of all ages,--the enormous field of knowledge which it
is necessary to cover in order to live with intelligence and moral
insight. Know one thing well and you have the power to apprehend
many things is the academic solution, which has not worked
altogether badly, but it cannot be stretched to fit our present
occasion,--the “Enlightenment of the Masses.” What we may call
the ‘academic’ doctrine assumes that mind like body is capable
of development in various directions by means of due exercise.
Profounder educational thought, however, reveals mind to us as of
enormous capacity, self-active, present in everyone and making but
one demand--its proper pabulum. Feed mind duly and its activities
take care of themselves. As the well-fed workman is fit for all his
labours, so the duly nourished mind knows, thinks, feels, judges
with general righteousness. The good man and magnanimous citizen is
he who has been fed with food convenient for him.

Such a view of education naturally includes religion, not only “for
his God doth instruct him and doth teach him,” but because we may
take knowledge roughly as of three sorts,--knowledge of God, to be
got first-hand through the sacred writings, knowledge of man, to be
arrived at through history, poetry, tale; through the customs of
cities and nations, civics; through the laws of self-government,
morals. One other great branch of knowledge remains. Every youth
should know something of the flowers of the field, the birds of the
air, the stars in their courses, the innumerable phenomena that
come under general observation; he should have some knowledge of
physics, though chemistry perhaps should be reserved for those who
have a vocation that way.

Here are we on the verge of that new life for our country which we
all purpose, faced with infinite possibilities on either hand,--the
vast range of knowledge and the vast educability of mind. Another
certainty presents itself, that we have not time for short cuts:
the training of muscle and sense, however necessary, does not
nourish mind; and, on the other hand, the verbiage of a lecturer is
not assimilated. There is no education but self-education and only
as the young student works with his own mind is anything effected.

But we are not without hope. An astounding field has been
opened to us; thousands of children in Council Schools are doing
incredible things with freedom and joy. They have taken in hand
their own education and are greedy of knowledge for its own sake,
knowledge in the three great fields that I have indicated.

The fact is that a great discovery has been vouchsafed to
us, greater, I think, as concerns education, than any since
the invention of the first alphabet. Let us again refer to
Coleridge[50] on the origin of great discoveries. Coleridge gives
no qualification to the minds which receive these great ideas,
they are not described as great minds, but, he says, they are
“previously prepared to receive them,” that is, the great ideas.
If the reader will forgive me for saying so I think my mind has
been so prepared--by extraordinary incapacity in one direction, the
direction, roughly, of academic attainments, and by some degree of
capacity in other directions, and it has been gradually borne in
upon me that this incapacity and this capacity are pretty general,
and perhaps afford a key to the problem of education. A further
preparation came to me in unusual opportunities for testing and
understanding the minds of children and young people. I am anxious
to bring this idea of a discovery before the reader because our
methods are so simple and obvious that people are inclined to take
them up at random and say that extensive reading is a “good idea
which we have all tried more or less” and that free narration
“is a good plan in which there is nothing new.” It is true that
we all read and that narration is as natural as breathing, its
value depending solely upon what is narrated. What we have perhaps
failed to discover hitherto is the immense hunger for knowledge
(curiosity) existing in everyone and the immeasurable power of
attention with which everyone is endowed; that everyone likes
knowledge best in a literary form: that the knowledge should be
exceedingly various concerning many things on which the mind of
man reflects; but that knowledge is acquired only by what we may
call “the _act of knowing_,” which is both encouraged and tested
by narration, and which further requires the later test and record
afforded by examinations. This is nothing new, you will say, and
possibly no natural law in action appears extraordinarily new; we
take flying already as a matter of course; but though there is
nothing surprising in the action of natural laws, the results are
exceedingly surprising, and to that test we willingly submit these
methods.

“All is not for all” was the sad conclusion of that Danish patriot
and prophet. No doubt Grundtvig thought of the impassable barriers
presented by a poor and mean vocabulary and a field of thought
without literary background. So “all is not for all” he said, even
as a prophet of our own proclaims that a worthy education is only
for the _élite_. Books are not for the people, was Grundtvig’s
conclusion; wherefore those young Danes were lectured to by men
of enthusiasm who had their country’s literature and history at
their fingers’ ends and could convey the temper of their own minds.
A great deal was effected, but minds nourished at the lips of a
teacher have not the stability of those which seek their own meat.

But what if all _were_ for all, if the great hope of Comenius--“All
knowledge for all men”--were in process of taking shape? This is
what we have established in many thousands of cases, even in those
of dull and backward children, that any person can understand any
book of the right calibre (a question to be determined mainly by
the age of the young reader); that the book must be in literary
form; that children and young persons require no elucidation
of what they read; that their attention does not flag while so
engaged; that they master a few pages at a single reading so
thoroughly that they can ‘tell it back’ at the time or months
later whether it be the _Pilgrim’s Progress_ or one of Bacon’s
Essays or Shakespeare’s plays; that they throw individuality
into this telling back so that no two tell quite the same tale;
that they learn incidentally to write and speak with vigour and
style and usually to spell well. Now this art of telling back is
_Education_ and is very enriching. We all practise it, we go over
in our minds the points of a conversation, a lecture, a sermon, an
article, and we are so made that only those ideas and arguments
which we go over are we able to retain. Desultory reading or
hearing is entertaining and refreshing, but is only educative here
and there as our attention is strongly arrested. Further, we not
only retain but realise, understand, what we thus go over. Each
incident stands out, every phrase acquires new force, each link
in the argument is riveted, in fact we have performed THE ACT OF
KNOWING, and that which we have read, or heard, becomes a part
of ourselves, it is assimilated after the due rejection of waste
matter. Like those famous men of old we have found out “knowledge
meet for the people” and to our surprise it is the best knowledge
conveyed in the best form that they demand. Is it possible that
hitherto we have all been like those other teachers of the past who
were chidden because they had taken away the key of knowledge, not
entering in themselves and hindering those who would enter in?

To-day we are in this position. We realise that there is an act of
knowing to be performed; that no one can know without this act,
that it must be self-performed, that it is as agreeable and natural
to the average child or man as singing is to the song thrush,
that “to know” is indeed a natural function. Yet we hear of the
_incuria_ which prevails in most schools, while there before us are
the young consumed with the desire to know, can we but find out
what they want to know and how they require to be taught.

Humanistic education, whether in English or Latin, affects conduct
powerfully; knowledge of this sort is very welcome to children
and young persons; a good deal of ground may be covered because a
single reading of a passage suffices; this sort of humanistic work
has been tried with good effect; and if our Continuation Schools
are to be of value they must afford an education on some such lines.

The Parents’ Union School, originally organised[51] for the benefit
of children educated at home, is worked by means of programmes
followed by examination papers sent out term by term. When the same
work, if not the whole of it, was taken up by Council Schools,[52]
the advantage of such an organisation was apparent, especially in
that it afforded a common curriculum for children of all classes.
By using this curriculum we were enabled to see that the slum child
in a poor school compares quite favourably with the child of clever
or opulent parents who had given heed to his education.

Now one of our national difficulties is the fact that we have
no common basis of thought or ground for reflection. No doubt,
by pretty copious reading, links of common interests might be
established, and the schoolroom might do at least as much for
the general life as does the cricket-pitch. The scheme works
practically without a hitch in Council Schools; this is the sort of
work that the highest class in these Schools, (in Standard VII),
are doing with great success and very great delight. They read
English, French and General History (three or four volumes), two or
three books dealing with citizenship and morals from various points
of view; Literature, contemporary with the history read (several
works); natural history, physical geography and science (three or
four books); Scripture (chiefly the Bible). Every term brings a new
programme of work, the continuation usually of books already in
reading. Children in Secondary Schools and in families remain for
one year in Form IV and that work seems adapted to the status of
Continuation Schools for the first year or two. After that the more
advanced programme (Forms V and VI) might be used in the same way.
This work would appeal to young people as being unlike the ordinary
school grind, and as giving them opportunity for consecutive
speaking and essay writing.

There is probably no better test of a liberal education than the
number of names a person is able to use accurately and familiarly
as occasion requires. We all recollect a character of Miss Austen’s
who had no opinion to offer as to whether the Bermudas should be
described as the West Indies or not, because she had never called
them anything in her life!

Now, here is an alphabetical (uncorrected) list taken from the
examination papers of a girl of thirteen, containing 213 proper
names, all of them used accurately, easily and with interest.

  Amaziah, Ariel, Ayrshire, Arcot, America, Austrian Army,
  Artemidorus, Antium, Aufidius, Auditors, Apotheosis, Altai
  Mts., Assouan, Africa, Atbara, Annulosa, Arachnoida, Armadillo,
  Albumen, Abdomen, Auricles, Angle, Arc.

  Burns (Robert), Bastille, Bombay, Bengal, Burke, Black Hole
  of Calcutta, British Museum, Benevolence, Basalt, Butterfly,
  Beetles, Blood-vessels, Berber, Blue Nile Baghdad, Burne Jones.

  Cowper, Calcutta, Clive, Canada, Colonel Luttrel, Cleopatra,
  Candace, Coriolanus, Cassowary, Cormorants, Curlews, Cranes,
  Calyptra, Cotton grass, Chalk, Conglomerate, Crustacea,
  Cheiroptera, Carnivora, Chyle, Centre of Circle, China Proper,
  Canton, Cairo, Cheops, Circe.

  ‘Dick Primrose,’ “Deserted Village,” Dupleix, Demotic characters,
  Ducks, Despotic Government, Doctor Livingstone, Deposits, Delta,
  Diaphragm, Duodenum.

  England, East India Company, Economical Reform, Europe, Emperor
  of Austria, Empress of Russia, Emu, Eastern Turkestan, Egypt.

  France, Frederick the Great, Frederick William of Prussia,
  Flightless birds, First Cataract, Foraminifera.

  Gadarenes, Gizeh, Great Commoner, George III, General Warrants,
  Governor General, Grace and Free-will, Greek language,
  Generosity, Gulls, Granite, Grubs, Gastric juice, Globules.

  Huldah, Highlands of Scotland, Herodotus, Hieroglyphics, Herons,
  Hoang-ho, Hedgehog, Hydrochloric Acid, Hydrocarbons, Heart.

  Isaiah, India, Influence of light.

  Josiah, Judah, Jehosaphat, Jerusalem, Jonas, Jonah, Jesuits,
  Jansenists, Japan.

  Künersdorf, Kuen Lun Mts., Kioto, Karnac, Khartum, Kolcheng,
  Kalabari.

  Lord North, “Lords in Waiting” of Love, Land birds, Lamellæ,
  Luxor, Lake Ngami, Loanda, Lake Nyassa.

  Manasseh, Mongolia, Manchuria, Madras, Mahrattas, Member of
  Parliament, Middlesex, Methodists, Mississippi Company, Maria
  Theresa, Mummies, Microscopic Shells, Membrane.

  Nagasaki, Nile, Nitrogenous food.

  ‘Olivia Primrose,’ Ostriches.

  Pharisees, ‘Primrose (Mrs.),’ Philosophers Plassey, Pitt, Prime
  Minister, Pragmatic Sanction, Prague, Peace of Hubertusburg,
  Pity, Puffins, Penguins, Plovers, Pelicans, Plants, Polytrichum
  formosum, Peristom, Porphyric, Puddingstone, Pepsin, Peptone,
  Pancreas, Pulmonary artery, Pamir Plateau, Prairies, Pyramid,
  Portuguese West Africa.

  Quilemane.

  Rome, Rossbach, Rosetta Stone, Rhea, Rodentia.

  Sea of Galilee, ‘Sophia Primrose,’ Surajah Dowlah, Seven Years’
  War, Silesia, Saxony, Secretary, Storks, Sandpipers, Seedlings.

  “The Task,” Treaty of Dresden, Tullus, Trade Unions, Trustees,
  Treasurer, Tropical countries.

  Ulysses, Ungulata.

  Volcanic eruptions, Vermes, Vertebrate, Villi, Ventricles, Vernæ
  Cavæ, Vicar of Wakefield, Volscians, Vice President.

  Wallace, Walpole, War of Independence, Wilkes, Whitfield, Wesley,
  War of the Austrian Succession, Water birds, Wady Halfa.

  Yang-tse-kiang.

  Zonga, Zambesi, Zorndorff.

This is ‘Secondary’ work, but supposing the young people of a
Continuation School, who could not read all the books on the
programmes, got some degree of intimacy, some association, with,
say, one hundred such names in a term, we might believe that they
were receiving a liberal education. This is the sort of work we
hope to see done in Continuation Schools by pupils from fourteen
to sixteen. The young people of the future between sixteen and
eighteen should be prepared to work in Forms V and VI.

It is not the best children that answer the examination questions;
the general rule is that everybody takes every question. I have
touched only on the more humanistic subjects as whatever is done
in Mathematics, for instance, the Head of the Continuation School
will no doubt arrange; and indeed so much has been done in the
Elementary School already that probably the keeping of fictitious
account books would be a sufficient exercise for young people who
show some mathematical talent.

No cost whatever is attached to the adoption and continued working
of this method[53] except the cost of books and of these, young
wage-earners would no doubt buy their own, so that by degrees
each would form his little library of books that he has read,
understands and knows his way about. I should like to quote a few
sentences from Professor Eucken on the education of the people:--

  “By education of the people it must not for a moment be supposed
  that we mean a special kind of education. We do not refer to
  a condensed preparation of our spiritual and intellectual
  possessions, suitable for the needs and interests of the great
  masses; we are not thinking of a diluted concoction of the real
  draught of education which we are so kind and condescending as
  to dispense to the majority. No!... There is only one education
  common to us all.” “We can all unite in the construction of a
  spiritual world over against that of petty human routine. Thus
  there is, in truth, a possibility of a truly human education, and
  therefore of a true education of the people.”

The Jena Professor sees clearly enough the task before us all; but
he sees, or sets forth, no possible way of accomplishing it, nor
is there any other way than that which we have set forth that can
afford this sort of liberal education; the electric telegraph was
not discovered twice over.

After all our protests we are in our way utilitarian for no other
study is so remunerative as that of the ‘humanities.’ Let me draw
the reader’s attention to one point. Instability, unrest, among our
wage-earners is the serious danger threatening our social life.
Now it is said that nothing can act but where it is and the class
which acts steadily where it is, at some outpost of empire, on a
home estate, in Parliament, where you will, is the class educated
at Public Schools, that is, men brought up on the ‘humanities.’
Strong language will be used about the deadness and decadence of
these men although they do much of our national work. Their defects
are obvious and manifold, but still, as I say, the public work
that is done is, for the most part, done by men whom no one could
describe as progressive. Is there not some confusion of ideas about
this fetish of progress? Do we not confound progress with movement,
action, assuming that where these are there is necessarily advance?
Whereas much of our activity is like the waves of the sea, going
always and arriving never. What we desire is the still progress
of growth that comes of root striking downwards and fruit urging
upwards. And this progress in character and conduct is not attained
through conditions of environment or influence but only through the
growth of ideas, received with conscious intellectual effort.

It will be possible to have only a little of this strong meat in
Continuation Schools, but a little goes a long way, how far, our
Public School men illustrate; for a careful analysis will bring us
to the conclusion that not Latin and Greek, Games, Athletics, or
environment, but the ‘humanities’ in English alone will bring forth
the stability and efficiency which we desire to see in all classes
of society.

I have said that we have after all a generous allowance of cloth
from which to cut our garment, seven or eight hours a week. In
that time we may get in, page for page, book for book, as full a
complement of the ‘humanities,’ poetry, history, essay, tragedy,
comedy, philosophy, between the ages of fourteen and eighteen, as
our public men have imbibed at their schools. To be sure these
do it in the classic tongues while for those there is only plain
English; but however duly we magnify Greek literature we cannot
honestly say that that of England is second to any the world
has yet seen. We can give to the people the thought of the best
minds and we can secure on their part the conscious intellectual
effort, the act of knowing, which bears fruit in capability,
character and conduct. We cannot offer to the people the grace of
scholarship in the allotted time, but no doubt earnest souls will
find a way to get this surpassing excellence also; if there be
profit in ‘grinding at Grammar’ that they must forego, too, but
the inspiration and delight of entering into an intellectual world
full of associations, this they should have, a well of healing and
fountain of delight.

Now a common ground of thought is inestimable in what may be
called its cohesive value; and what we desire to afford to the
nation at large is such another background of thought, sketched in
like that of the Public School man from the books men and women
have read at school, books which made them intimate with Pitt and
Fox, ‘Dick Swiveller,’ ‘Mrs. Quickly,’ with daffodils and clouds
and nightingales as the poets have seen them, with a thousand
promiscuous and seemingly purposeless scenes and sayings which
somehow combine to serve the purpose of a background throwing the
thoughts and incidents of to-day into clear relief. For this reason
we, like the Public Schools, all read the same books, with such an
intensive single reading that for the rest of the lives of these
young people phrases or allusions they come across will kindle in
their eyes that ‘light which never was on sea or land.’ We may hope
that Public Schools will presently add this modicum of English to
their classical studies; then the candidate for election will have
something to appeal to other than the desire to better himself,
which is supposed to dominate every man. By the way, is the paucity
of literary or historical allusions, not in Latin, to be heard
in the House due to the fact that the audience cannot be counted
upon to rise to a reference not included in the well-known school
books? If so, we shall change all that; once the _masses_ read, the
_classes_ must read, too, and the Peace will be signalised by a new
bond of intellectual life in common.

“There is no more dreadful sight,” says Goethe, “than ignorance
in action,” and is not this the sight that is at the present
time dismaying us all? Demos is king to-day, and who may dispute
his right? But let us all give him the chance to become that
philosopher-king who according to an ancient dream was to be the
fit ruler, or rulers, of the people. The hopeful sign is that
Demos himself perceives his lack, and clamours for the humanistic
education in which he sees his salvation.




CHAPTER IV

THE BASIS OF NATIONAL STRENGTH[54]

A LIBERAL EDUCATION FROM A NATIONAL STANDPOINT


I

KNOWLEDGE

We have from time to time given some attention to the failure of
our attempts to educate “The Average Boy,” and it may be useful
to look into one or two fundamental principles upon which this
question and others seem to me to depend. For if our conceptions
of education are heterogeneous and incoherent, naturally, we
shall have a tangle of examination schemes evolved to test our
ill-conceived work.

Educationally, we are in a bad way. We were told some time ago,
in _Across the Bridges_, of the rapid deterioration of the bright
intelligent responsive schoolboy who has passed through the sixth
and seventh standards. Why? we ask. Industrial unrest often
reveals virtue, even heroism of a sort, in the working man, but a
lamentable want of knowledge--lack of education; he appears to have
little insight, imagination, or power of reflection. The tendency
in his class is that “dangerous tendency which we must all do our
best to resist” indicated by Mr. Burns at a public meeting some few
years ago; “the spirit of the horde,” he said, “is being developed;
and whether it is in exhibitions, sports, or legislation, the
individual is becoming less and less important and the mob more
and more so.” And again, “the tendency of the present day in all
modern movements is for great crowds to be brought together to see
other people play; and that is extending not only to play, but to
other fields of life.” Could the industrial movement of to-day be
better diagnosed? Again we ask, Why? As for those young men from
Public Schools who fail in the Dominions, enough has been said
about them; but those other Public School men who succeed in a
measure at outposts of the Empire because of the virtue that is in
them, do they not fail sometimes in an equal measure for lack of
the insight, imagination, intelligence, which come of knowledge? As
for the people who stay at home, “educated” men and women, I write
as an old woman who remembers how in the sixties and seventies
“countenance” was much talked of; “an intelligent countenance,”
“a fine countenance,” “a noble countenance,” were matters of
daily comment. The word has dropped out of use; is it because the
thing signified has dropped out of existence? Countenance is a
manifestation of thought, feeling, intelligence; and it is none of
these, but stolid indifference combined with physical well-being,
that we read in many faces to-day.

If we have these grounds for discontent, education is no doubt
the culprit at the bar, though there never was, I suppose, a
more heroic and devoted body of teachers at work. They get for
themselves the greater blessing of those who give; but the children
suffer, poor little souls; “poured into like a bucket,” they
receive without stint, and little comes of it. There is no lack
of zeal on the part of the teaching profession, but there is a
tendency amongst us to depreciate knowledge and to depreciate our
scholars. Now, knowledge is the material of education, as flour is
the material of bread; there are substitutes for knowledge, no
doubt, as there are for flour. Before the era of free meals I heard
of a little girl in East London whose mother gave her a penny, to
buy dinner for herself and her little sister, when the two set out
for school. The child confided to her teacher that a ha’porth of
aniseed drops “stays your stomach” more than a halfpenny bun. Now,
our schools are worked more or less upon aniseed drops--marks,
prizes, scholarships, blue ribbons, all of which “stay the stomach”
of the boy who does not get the knowledge that he needs. That is
the point. He needs knowledge as much as he needs bread and milk;
his appetite for knowledge is as healthy as his appetite for his
dinner; and an abundant regular supply at short intervals of
various knowledge is a constitutional necessity for the growing
youth as well as for the curious child; and yet we stay his hunger
pangs upon “aniseed drops.”

We do worse. We say, “What is the good of knowledge? Give a boy
professional instruction, whether he is to be a barrister or a
bricklayer, and strike out from his curriculum Greek or geography,
or whatever is not of utilitarian value. Teach him to play the game
and handle the ropes of his calling, and you have done the best for
him.” Now, here is a most mischievous fallacy, an assertion that
a child is to be brought up for the uses of society only and not
for his own uses. Here we get the answer to the repeated question
that suggested itself in a survey of our educational condition. We
launch children upon too arid and confined a life. Now personal
delight, joy in living, is a chief object of education; Socrates
conceived that knowledge is for pleasure, in the sense, not that
knowledge is one source, but is the source of pleasure.

It is for their own sakes that children should get knowledge.
The power to take a generous view of men and their motives, to
see where the greatness of a given character lies, to have one’s
judgment of present events illustrated and corrected by historic
and literary parallels, to have, indeed, the power of comprehensive
judgment--these are admirable assets within the power of every
one according to the measure of his mind; and these are not the
only gains which knowledge affords. The person who can live upon
his own intellectual resources and never know a dull hour (though
anxious and sad hours will come) is indeed enviable in these
days of intellectual inanition, when we depend upon spectacular
entertainments _pour passer le temps_.

If knowledge means so much to us, “What is knowledge?” the reader
asks. We can give only a negative answer. Knowledge is not
instruction, information, scholarship, a well-stored memory. It is
passed, like the light of a torch, from mind to mind, and the flame
can be kindled at original minds only. Thought, we know, breeds
thought; it is as vital thought touches our minds that our ideas
are vitalized, and out of our ideas comes our conduct of life. The
case for reform hardly needs demonstration, but now we begin to see
the way of reform. The direct and immediate impact of great minds
upon his own mind is necessary to the education of a child. Most of
us can get into touch with original minds chiefly through books;
and if we want to know how far a school provides intellectual
sustenance for its scholars, we may ask to see the list of books in
reading during the current term. If the list be short, the scholar
will not get enough mind-stuff; if the books are not various, his
will not be an all-round development; if they are not original, but
compiled at second hand, he will find no material in them for his
intellectual growth. Again, if they are too easy and too direct,
if they tell him straight away what he is to think, he will read,
but he will not appropriate. Just as a man has to eat a good dinner
in order that his physical energies may be stimulated to select
and secrete that small portion which is vital to him, so must the
intellectual energies be stimulated to extract what the individual
needs by a generous supply, and also by a way of presentation that
is not obvious. We have the highest authority for the indirect
method of teaching proper to literature, and especially to poetry.
The parables of Christ remain dark sayings; but what is there more
precious in the world’s store of knowledge?

How injurious then is our habit of depreciating children; we water
their books down and drain them of literary flavour, because we
wrongly suppose that children cannot understand what we understand
ourselves; what is worse, we explain and we question. A few
pedagogic maxims should help us, such as, “Do not explain” “Do not
question,” “Let one reading of a passage suffice,” “Require the
pupil to relate the passage he has read.” The child must read to
know; his teacher’s business is to see that he knows. All the acts
of generalization, analysis, comparison, judgment, and so on, the
mind performs for itself in the act of knowing. If we doubt this,
we have only to try the effect of putting ourselves to sleep by
relating silently and carefully, say, a chapter of Jane Austen or
a chapter of the Bible, read once before going to bed. The degree
of insight, the visualization, that comes with this sort of mental
exercise is surprising.

As I have said, a child in his seventh year will relate _The
Pilgrim’s Progress_, chapter by chapter, though he cannot read it,
and some half-dozen other books of the best we can find for him. In
his eighth or ninth year he works happily with a dozen books at a
time, books of history, adventures, travels, poems. From his tenth
to his twelfth year he reads considerable books of English and
French history, seriously written, Shakespeare’s historical plays,
North’s _Plutarch’s Lives_, and a dozen other worthy books. As he
goes up the school, his reading becomes wider and more difficult,
but every one knows the reading proper at the ages of fifteen,
seventeen, eighteen. The right books are given, but not enough
of them. The reading dietary is too meagre for the making of a
full man. A score of first-rate books should appear in the school
curriculum term by term. The point that I insist upon, however, is
that from his sixth year the child should be an “educated child”
for his age, should love his lesson books, and enjoy a terminal
examination on the books he has read. Children brought up largely
on books compare favourably with those educated on a few books and
many lectures; they have generous enthusiasms, keen sympathies, a
wide outlook and sound judgment, because they are treated from the
first as beings of “large discourse looking before and after.” They
are persons of leisure too, with time for hobbies, because their
work is easily done in the hours of morning school.

It is not necessary to speak of modern languages and mathematics,
field work in natural history, handiwork, etc. Schools are pretty
much agreed about the treatment of these subjects. As for Latin and
Greek, the teaching of these and the possibility of getting in any
work beyond these is a crucial question; but I think it is open to
Public Schoolmasters to discover that, given boys who have read
and thought, and who have maintained the habit of almost perfect
attention that a child begins with, the necessary amount of work in
the Classics may be done in a much shorter time, and that the mind
of the pupil is the more alert because it is engaged in handling
various subjects.

Perhaps, too, some enlightened Headmaster may come to distinguish
between scholarship and knowledge--a distinction which practical
men, like Napoleon, for example, have known how to draw. Probably
there never was a life on which the ‘humanities’ exercised a more
powerful influence; rarely has there been such an example of the
power of the informed mind to conquer the world. Napoleon is the
final answer to the contention that a knowledge of books has no
practical value, for there was, perhaps, no incident in his career
that was not suggested, inspired, illustrated by some historical
precedent, some literary apophthegm. He was, as we know, no
scholar, but he read diligently, even in the midst of absorbing
affairs, Homer, the Bible, the Koran, poetry, history, Plutarch.

Nations grow great upon books as truly as do individuals. We know
how that heroic young Queen, Louisa of Prussia, perceived that the
downfall of her country was not due to Napoleon alone, but also
to national ignorance, and that if Prussia were to rise it must
be through the study of history. So she set herself to work at
the history of modern Europe during that sojourn at Memel, when
she knew poverty as a peasant woman knows it. The disciples of
Kant founded a league of virtue to arouse Prussian students to the
duty of patriotism; Fichte knew how to issue a trumpet call; the
nation became a nation of students, and the son of Queen Louisa
established the German Empire! Alas, that an age should have
come when the ‘humanities’ were proscribed on German soil--and
humanity followed them into exile! A noble view of education was
as righteousness exalting a nation; but, alas, we all know what
universal havoc and disaster have proceeded from the debased and
materialised theory of education promulgated at Munich.

The Danes, again, as we all know, owe their rise out of illiteracy
to the Napoleonic impulse. After we had seized their battleships,
by way of clipping the claws of Bonaparte, they set to work to make
themselves the first farmers in Europe; this they have done in and
through their schools and their continuation schools, where they
get, not technical instruction, but a pretty wide course in history
and literature. As for the Japanese revolution of some fifty years
ago, history has little to show of a finer quality; and this,
again, was the work of a literary people.

If we would not be left behind by the East and the West we must,
as other nations have done, “add to our virtue, knowledge”; and we
are still competent, as some of these are not, to mount from the
bottom rung of the Apostolic educational ladder. It rests with us
to add to our faith, virtue, and to our virtue, knowledge. It is
an unheard of thing that the youth of a great nation should grow
up without those ideals, slow enough in maturing, which are to be
gathered for the most part from wide and wisely directed reading.


II

LETTERS, KNOWLEDGE AND VIRTUE

The following fragments of a valuable letter illustrate the
contention of the foregoing chapter:--

  “There is one thing, however, one note of regret, and that is
  that one paragraph, that on classical education, was not more
  expanded. I am satisfied that your central view covers the whole
  truth; and I am going to give you a small individual experience
  illustrating this fact--viz., that an early education in the
  great books of our own language, read, with enjoyment, by
  children and appropriately given to them from year to year, is
  the true groundwork of later expansion. Here is the story:--My
  three daughters were suckled on Walter Scott and Shakespeare.
  Later, about the ages of from ten to twelve, off their own, they
  took up Plutarch’s Lives, Bunyan, Defoe, and in the same period
  they refused to learn arithmetic and geography, the former on
  the ground of its monotony, and the latter, because, although
  they loved it, they held that the existing system of teaching
  geography was ‘rotten,’ and that geography ought to be learnt by
  going to the places. I knew better than to remonstrate. I meekly
  suggested that perhaps they would substitute something else in
  their curriculum, and they said at once, in an obviously prepared
  sentence, ‘That’s just it, we want to learn Latin and harmony.’
  Now here comes _your_ point (in that lamentably abbreviated
  paragraph):--

  ‘Given boys (or girls) who have read and thought, and who have
  maintained the habit of almost perfect attention that a child
  begins with, the necessary amount of work in the classics may be
  done in a much shorter time, and the mind of the pupil is the
  more alert because it is engaged in handling various subjects.’

  Six months later these girls knew more Latin than I learnt in
  six years under distinguished scholars with very eminent names.
  They could sling passages from Horace appropriately; they knew
  the first two Eclogues and half the Æneid by heart; they regarded
  Cicero’s Letters to Atticus as a ‘penny post’ affair, and were
  quite unduly familiar with the private life of Seneca. But all
  this did not interfere with their painting or their horsemanship,
  and better authorities on cricket and the Turf I don’t happen to
  know. That is the illustrative episode. The point, in my mind, is
  that an early education from great books with the large ideas and
  the large virtues is the only true foundation of knowledge--the
  knowledge worth having.”

This interesting letter brings us straight to a question which I
thought had been pretty fully threshed out; and I tackle it with
diffidence, only because an outsider may see aspects overlooked by
experts. The gist of the charges brought against Public Schools
is,--Classics take up so much time that there is no opportunity for
_Litteræ Humaniores_ in any other form. It is easy to say,--Gain
time by giving up Greek; but, in the first place, Public Schools,
with our old Universities in sequence, are our educational
achievement. Other efforts are experimental, but this one thing we
know--that men are turned out from this course who are practically
unmatched for quality, culture, and power; even the average B.A.
shows up better than his compeers, and a degree in Arts signifies
more than one in any other faculty.

We return thus to my original contention--that letters, primarily,
are the content of knowledge; that if Wellington ever said how
Waterloo was won, it was not on the playing-fields only, but in the
class-rooms of Eton; that Cæsar, Thucydides, _Prometheus Bound_,
have won more battles than we know on fields civil and military.
A little strong meat goes a long way, and even the average Public
School boy turns out a capable man. But, alas, if capable, he is
also ignorant; he does not know the history and literature of
his own country or any other. He has not realised that knowledge
is, not a store, but rather a state that a person remains within
or drops out of. His degree taken, he shuts his books, reads the
newspapers a little, perhaps a magazine or two, but otherwise
occupies himself with the interests of sports, games, shows, or
his employment. What is to be done, we wonder vaguely, to secure
to this average boy some tincture of knowledge and some taste for
knowledge? The expedient of dropping Greek to make room for other
things recurs; but on reflection we say, “No”; for culture begins
with the knowledge that everything has been known and everything
has been perfectly said these two thousand years ago and more.
This knowledge, slowly drummed into a youth, should keep him from
swelled head, from joining in the “We are the people” cry of the
blatant patriot; and there is no better way of knowing a people
than to know something of their own words in their own speech.

It is well, by the way, that we should remember that we have as a
nation an enormous loss to make good; time was, and not so long
ago, when rich and poor were intimately familiar with one of the
three great classical literatures. Men’s thoughts were coloured,
their speech moulded, their conduct more or less governed, by
the pastoral idylls called “Genesis,” the impassioned poetry of
Isaiah, the divine philosophy of John, the rhetoric of Paul--all,
writings, like the rest of the Bible, in what Matthew Arnold calls
“the grand manner.” Here is the well of English undefiled from
which men have drawn the best that our literature holds, as well as
their philosophy of life, their philosophy of history, and that
principal knowledge we are practising to do without--the knowledge
of God. And we wonder that the governing classes should forget how
to rule as those who serve; and that the working man, brought up
on “Readers” in lieu of a great literature, should act with the
obstinate recklessness proper to ignorance.

But to return to the main issue. How shall we instruct the
ignorance and yet retain the classical culture of the average
Public School boy? I should like to suggest, again, with
diffidence, that he, like his more brilliant compeer, is driven
through a mill the outpour of which should be scholarship. Now,
scholarship is an exquisite distinction which it would be ill
for us as a nation to miss; but if all the men in an assemblage
were decorated, who would care to wear an order? Some things are
precious for their rarity, and to put a school in the running
for this goal is as absurd as the ambition of the little boy who
meant to be a Knight of the Garter when he grew up. The thing is
not to be done; some men are born to be scholars, as the shape
of their heads testifies. The rest of us take pleasure in their
decoration, but are not envious, for scholarship is not the best
thing, and does not necessarily imply that vital touch of mind
upon mind out of which is got knowledge. As for erudition, we may
leave that out of count, it is hardly even an aim at the present
time. The geniuses, as one to some thousands, say, of our best, do
not trouble themselves much about the regimen we offer--classics
or modern languages, or what not; an idle tale, a puppet show, the
meanest flower that blows, is enough for them. Anyway, they take
care of themselves, and we come back to the average boy.

He must learn his Greek and Latin, but there is an easier way;
the girls mentioned in the letter I cite had hit upon it. That
favourite girl pupil of Vittorino’s who spoke and wrote Greek
with “remarkable purity” at twelve, having, so to speak, done
with Latin at an earlier age--she, we may be sure, had not been
through the grammar school grind. Nor had any of the learned ladies
of the Italian and the French Renaissance, the list of whose
accomplishments leaves us breathless. While still children, we know
how early they married, their knowledge of the classics was copious
(and not too wholesome), they knew two or three modern languages,
could treat the wounded, nurse the sick, prepare simples, govern
great households, ride to chase, yes, and kill too! and do
exquisite embroidery. Our own women of the Tudor times appear
likewise to have been “infinitely informed” and to have carried
their learning gaily; Maria Theresa, by no means a learned lady,
could make speeches and converse with her Magyar nobles in Latin,
and they could respond, neither knowing the native speech of the
other. If these things were true of girls and women, how much more
was expected of boys and men!

Are we persons of less intelligence, or how did they do it all?
_Every preparatory school knows how._ Perhaps few boys enter Public
Schools who could not pass “Responsions,” that is, who are not,
as far as Greek goes, ready for Oxford. I once heard a Headmaster
say:--

  “A boy does as much Latin now by the age of twelve as he will
  ever need for examination purposes, and he spends the next eight
  years in doing over again and again the same work! A clever boy
  of twelve could easily pass Responsions.”

A headmaster in Newfoundland mentions in his school report for 1905
a boy who “began Greek in October and passed the Oxford Responsions
in January.”

There is a leakage somewhere, and there is overlapping, and both
are due to the examinations upon which scholarships are awarded.
Something must be done, because Public Schools, with all their
splendid records, are not effective in the sense that they turn
out the average boy a good all-round man. For better or for worse,
who knows? the Democracy is coming in like a flood, and our old
foundations will be tossed about in the welter unless we make haste
to strengthen our weak places. Might not a commission--consisting
of two or three headmasters, as many preparatory school masters,
University “Dons,” and public men (once public school boys and
now the fathers of such boys) look into the question and devise
examination tests which shall safeguard Letters, ancient and
modern, without putting too high a premium upon scholarship?

Once the hands of schoolmasters were united, they would no doubt
devise means by which our friend, the average boy, would get such
a knowledge of the classics as should open life-long resources
to him. Like the ‘Baron of Bradwardine’ he would go about with a
pocket Livy (as he would say, “Titus Livius,”) to be read, not
laboured at a few lines at a time: _The Seven against Thebes_,
_Iphigenia in Aulis_, the few tragedies left to us by the great
dramatists would form part of the familiar background of his
thoughts. He would know somewhat of the best that has been written
in Greek and Latin, whether through printed translations or through
the text itself rendered in the sort of running translation which
some masters know how to give. _Pari passu_, he would do his share
of gerund-grind, and construe the two or three books of his present
limited acquaintance. But his limitations would be recognised, and
he would not be required to turn out Greek and Latin verse.

Meantime his master will require him to know pretty intimately a
hundred worthy books in addition to the great novels--to be read
in class periods, in vacation, and in leisure time--his knowledge
of each to be tested by a single bit of oral description or
written work in verse or prose. “Ground he at Grammar,” sums up
every successful school boy’s record as it did that of the dead
“Grammarian”; but the ten or twelve years of school life should
yield more than this.

I say nothing now about the teaching of science, for which most
schools provide, except that for our generation, science seems
to me to be the way of intellectual advance. All the same, the
necessity incumbent upon us at the moment is to inculcate a
knowledge of _Letters_. Men and their motives, the historical
sequence of events, principles for the conduct of life, in fact,
practical philosophy, is what the emergencies of the times require
us to possess, and to be able to communicate. These things are not
to be arrived at by any short cut of economics, eugenics, and the
like, but are the gathered harvests of many seasons’ sowing of
poetry, literature, history. The nation is in sore need of wise
men, and these must be made out of educated boys.


III

KNOWLEDGE, REASON, AND REBELLION

We have been very busy about education these sixty years or
more--diligently digging, pruning, watering; but there is something
amiss with our tree of knowledge; its fruits, both good and evil,
are of a mean, crabbed sort, with so little to choose between them
that superior persons find it hard to determine which is which.
To examine the individual apples would be a long process, but let
me take one at a venture: is it not true that a conviction of
irresponsibility characterises our generation?

If this be true, seeing that we all think as we have been brought
up to think, our education is at fault. Faulty education is to
blame if private property be recklessly injured in broad day, if
working men do vital injury to their country thinking to serve
their caste, if there be people who love to have it so, as long
as their own interests are immune. The melancholy fact is that
the people who do damage to private property, to public interests,
and to that more delicate asset of a nation, public opinion, are
all by way of being educated in their several degrees. All of them
can write and speak clearly, think logically if not sincerely,
and exhibit a certain practical ability. It is true that the War
has changed much and has brought us a temporary salvation, but
education must secure to us our gains or the last state of the
nation may be worse than the first.

No doubt we are better and not worse than our forefathers; and,
where we err, it is through ignorance. “Through ignorance ye did
it,” was said of the worst crime that men have done; and that
appalling offence was wrought for no worse reason than because it
is the habit of more or less lettered ignorance to follow specious
arguments to logical conclusions. The sapient East knows all
about it. Lady Lugard tells us how “the Copts have a saying that
‘in the beginning when God created things He added to everything
its second.’ ‘I go to Syria,’ said Reason; ‘I go with you,’ said
Rebellion.” We need not follow the other pairs that went forth, but
still Reason is apt to be accompanied by Rebellion when it sets out
in search of a logical issue.

For it is a fatal error to think that reason can take the place of
knowledge, that reason is infallible, that reasonable conclusions
are of necessity right conclusions. Reason is a man’s servant,
not his master; and behaves like a good and faithful servant--a
sort of ‘Caleb Balderstone,’ ready to lie royally in his master’s
behoof--and bring logical demonstration of any premiss which the
will chooses to entertain. But the will is the man, the will
chooses; and the man must _know_, if the will is to make just
and discriminating decisions. This is what Shakespeare, as great
a philosopher as a poet, set himself to teach us, line upon
line, precept upon precept. His ‘Leontes,’ ‘Othello,’ ‘Lear,’
‘Prospero,’ ‘Brutus,’ preach on the one text--that a man’s reason
brings certain infallible proofs of any notions he has wilfully
chosen to take up. There is no escape for us, no short cut; art is
long, especially the art of living.

In the days when the working man represented only the unit of
his family he picked up enough knowledge to go on with at church
and chapel, by scrutinizing his neighbour’s doings, in the
village parliament, held at pump or “public,” from the weekly
news-sheet. But we have changed all that: bodies of working men
have learned by means of union to act with a momentum which may
be paralysing or propelling _according to whether the men have
or have not knowledge_. Without knowledge, Reason carries a man
into the wilderness and Rebellion joins company. The man is not
to be blamed: it is a glorious thing to perceive your mind, your
reasoning power, acting of its own accord as it were and producing
argument after argument in support of any initial notion; how is
a man to be persuaded, when he wakes up to this tremendous power
he has of involuntary reasoning, that his conclusions are not
necessarily right, but rather that he who reasons without knowledge
is like a child playing with edged tools? Following his reason,
he acquires this and the other sort of freedom; but is it not
written:--

                        “Nor yet
      (Grave this upon thy heart!) if spiritual things
      Be lost through apathy, or scorn, or fear,
      Shalt thou thy humbler franchises support,
      However hardly won or justly dear.”

If, then, the manners and the destinies of men are shaped by
knowledge, it may be well to inquire further into the nature
of that evasive entity. Matthew Arnold helps us by offering a
threefold classification which appeals to common sense--knowledge
of God, knowledge of men, and knowledge of the natural world;
or, as we should say, Divinity, the Humanities, and Science.
But I think we may go further and say that Letters, if not (as
I said before) the main content of knowledge, constitute anyway
the container--the wrought salver, the exquisite vase, even the
alabaster box to hold the ointment.

If a man cannot think without words, if he who thinks with words
will certainly express his thoughts, what of the monosyllabic habit
that is falling upon men of all classes? The chatter of many women
and some men does not count, for thought is the last thing it is
meant to express. The Greeks believed that a training in the use
and power of words was the chief part of education, recognising
that if the thought fathers the word, so does the word in turn
father the thought. They concerned themselves with no language,
ancient or modern, save their own, but of that they acquired a
consummate appreciation. With the words came the great thoughts,
expressed in whatever way the emergencies of the State called
for--in wise laws, victorious battles, glorious temples, sculpture,
drama. For great thoughts anticipate great works; and these come
only to a people conversant with the great thoughts that have been
written and said. In what strength did the youngest and greatest
of our Premiers bring about the “revival of England”? He was
fortified by illimitable reading, by a present sense of a thousand
impossibilities that had been brought to pass--of a thousand
things so wisely said that wise action was a necessary outcome.
To say that we as a nation are suffering from our contemptuous
depreciation of knowledge is to say that we scorn Letters, the
proper vehicle of _all_ knowledge.

Let us glance at the three departments of knowledge to see in
regard to which of the three we are most in error. Some of us are
content with such knowledge of Divinity as is to be picked up from
the weekly sermon heard in church, but even with the qualification
of a degree in Arts I wonder do our divines lift us as much as
they might into that serener region where words fitly spoken beget
thoughts of peace and holy purpose? That worship is the main end
of our Church services is a sublime ideal, but, “The Way, without
which there is no going, the Truth, without which there is no
knowing, the Life, without which there is no living,” must needs
be set before us in “words that burn,” and we wait for preachers
like those of a bygone day, “Whose pulpit thunders shook a nation’s
soul.”

It is possible that the Church may err in keeping us underfed upon
that knowledge which is life, but she does not send us away empty.
We get some little share, too, of literature, poetry, history: a
phrase, a line, lights up a day for us; to read of Charles Fox’s
having said, “Poetry’s everything,” of that black conqueror of the
Soudan who said, “Without learning life would have neither pleasure
nor savour”--these things do us good, we cannot tell why.

But there is a region of apparent sterility in our intellectual
life. Science says of literature, “I’ll none of it,” and science is
the preoccupation of our age. Whatever we study must be divested to
the bone, and the principle of life goes with the flesh we strip
away: history expires in the process, poetry cannot come to birth,
religion faints; we sit down to the dry bones of science and say,
Here is knowledge, all the knowledge there is to know. “I think
that is very wonderful,” a little girl wrote in an examination
paper after trying to explain why a leaf is green. That little girl
had found the principle--admiration, wonder--which makes science
vital, and without wonder her highest value is, not spiritual, but
utilitarian. A man might as well collect matchboxes, like those
charming people in one of Anatole France’s novels, as search for
diatoma, unless the wonder of the world be ever fresh before his
eyes. In the eighteenth century science was alive, quick with
emotion, and therefore it found expression in literature. Still, a
Lister, a Pasteur, moves us, and we feel that in one department of
science, anyway, men stirred by the passion of humanity (“letters”
at the fountain head?) are doing monumental work.

But for the most part science as she is taught leaves us cold;
the utility of scientific discoveries does not appeal to the best
that is in us, though it makes a pretty urgent and general appeal
to our lower avidities. But the fault is not in science--that
mode of revelation which is granted to our generation, may we
reverently say?--but in our presentation of it by means of facts
and figures and demonstrations that mean no more to the general
audience than the point demonstrated, never showing the wonder and
magnificent reach of the law unfolded. The Hebrew poet who taught
us that “Breadcorn is bruised ... because his God doth instruct him
and doth teach him,” glorified life. Coleridge has revealed the
innermost secret, whether of science or literature: speaking on the
genesis of an idea, he says, “When the idea of Nature (presented
to chosen minds by a Higher Power than Nature herself),” etc. The
man who would write for us about the true inwardness of wireless
telegraphy, say, how truly it was a discovery, a revealing of that
which was there and had been there all along, might make our hearts
burn within us. No doubt there are many scientific men who are also
men of letters, and some scientific books as inspiring as great
poems--but science is waiting for its literature; and, though we
cannot live in shameful ignorance and must get what we can out of
the sources open to us, science as it is too commonly taught tends
to leave us crude in thought and hard and narrow in judgment.

We are told that in times of great upheaval it profits not to cast
blame on this or that section of the community; that we are all to
blame even for the offences of individuals; and we partly believe
it because our fathers have told us; thus did the prophets humble
themselves before God, and bemoaned each his exceeding great sin in
the sin of his people. We, too, are meek under chastisements, but
we are vague and, to that extent, insincere. Perhaps our duty is
to give serious thought to the problems of our national life; then
we may come to realise that man does not live by bread alone; we
may perceive that “bread” (or cake!) is our sole and final offer
to all persons of all classes; that we are losing our sense of any
values excepting money values; that our young men no longer see
visions, and are attracted to a career in proportion as “there’s
money in it.” Nothing can come out of nothing, and, if we bring up
the children of the nation on sordid hopes and low ambitions, need
we be surprised that every man plays for his own hand?

We recognise now and then, when the shoe pinches, that the nation
is in the threes of a revolution, but do we take trouble to find
out the cause of “industrial unrest” and the correct attitude
of the public towards that unrest? The revolution which is in
progress may, it seems to me, develop on either of two lines: the
men may get those “humbler franchises” they covet, but at the
loss of “spiritual things”--such as the character for fair play,
straight dealing, and loyalty to contract, which we like to think
of as distinctively English. But what about the warning that these
“humbler franchises” will be likewise lost? Trade unionism is no
new thing; centuries ago and for centuries, as we know, England
and Europe were under the dominion of those states within the
State--the Trades Guilds. At this distance of time we can afford
to admire these for the spiritual things to which they held fast;
their religious organisation, the thorough training they afforded
to their apprentices, and the obligation every member of a guild
was under to use just weights and measures and to turn out first
rate work of whatever kind. But, notwithstanding these moral
safeguards, the tyranny of the guilds became insupportable, and
they disappeared into the limbo of things no longer serviceable.
Could any dream of Socialism, again, offer more perfect conditions
than did the Russian village communes? But these too established a
tyranny which was felt to be more oppressive than serfdom itself:
the _Mir_ disappeared, lost in that Gehenna which engulfed the
guilds.

Wordsworth’s prophetic lines should instruct us. “However hardly
won or justly dear” those humbler franchises for which men are
standing out in their tens of thousands with unanimity, courage,
devotion to a cause justified by their REASON, they will not be
able to support those same franchises if spiritual things, the real
things of life, be lost in gaining them. Therefore we may predict
that the present movement may well issue in worse things but will
not issue in the triumph of either trade unionism or syndicalism.

Here is our opportunity. We blame the workmen for their
irresponsible action, for what seems to us the reckless way in
which the poorest are impoverished and multitudes of workers are
compelled to unwilling idleness. But those of us who are neither
miners nor owners may not allow ourselves irresponsible thought or
speech, and we may contribute our quota towards appeasement. It is
within everybody’s province to influence public opinion, if it be
only the opinion of two or three; we may raise the whole question
to a higher plane, the plane of those spiritual things--duty,
responsibility, brotherly love (towards all men)--which make the
final appeal. We could not, and we need not try to, obstruct the
revolution of which we are vaguely conscious, but we may help
to make it a turn of the wheel which shall bring us out of the
darkness of a Simplon Tunnel into the light and glory of a Lombard
plain. We may, respecting the claims of working men, perceive that
they demand too little, and that the things they demand are not
those which matter. Even the shock of a revolution is not too high
a price for an experience which should convince us that knowledge
is the basis of a nation’s strength.


IV

NEW AND OLD CONCEPTIONS OF KNOWLEDGE

I have so far advanced that “knowledge” is undefined and probably
indefinable; that it is a state out of which persons may pass and
into which they may return, but never a store upon which they
may draw; that knowledge-hunger is as universal as bread-hunger;
that our best provision for conveying knowledge is marvellously
successful with the best men, but rather futile with the second
best; that persons whose education has not enriched them with
knowledge store up information (statistics and other facts),
upon which they use their reasoning powers; that the attempt to
reason without knowledge is disastrous; and that, during the
present distress, England is, for various economical reasons, in
a condition of intellectual inanition consequent upon a failure
in her food supply, in this case the supply of food proper for
the mind. I have glanced at Knowledge under the three headings
suggested by one who speaks with authority, and have contended
that, even if the knowledge be divisible, the vehicle by which
it is carried is one and indivisible, and that it is generally
impossible for the mind to receive knowledge except through the
channel of letters.

But the mediæval mind had, as we know, a more satisfactory
conception of knowledge than we have arrived at. Knowledge is for
us a thing of shreds and patches, knowledge of this and of that,
with yawning gaps between.

The scholastic mediæval mind, probably working on the scattered
hints which the Scriptures offer, worked out a sublime _Filosofica
della Religione Cattolica_, pictured, for example, in the great
fresco painted by Simone Memmi and Taddeo Gaddi (which Ruskin
has taught us to know), and implied in “The Adoration of the
Lamb” painted by the two Van Eycks. In the first picture we get
a Pentecostal Descent, first, upon the cardinal virtues and the
Christian graces, then, upon prophets and apostles, and below these
upon the seven Liberal Arts represented each by its captain figure,
Cicero, Aristotle, Zoroaster, etc., none of them Christian, not
one of them a Hebrew. Here we get the magnificent idea that all
knowledge (undebased) comes from above and is conveyed to minds
which are, as Coleridge says, previously prepared to receive it;
and, further, that it comes to a mind so prepared, without question
as to whether it be the mind of pagan or Christian; a truly liberal
catholic idea, it seems to me, corresponding marvellously with the
facts of life. As sublime and even more explicit is the Promethean
fable which informed the Greek mind. With the sense of a sudden
plunge we come down to our own random and ineffectual notions, and
are tempted to cry with Wordsworth,--

              “Great God! I’d rather be
      A Pagan suckled in a creed outworn,”

and know that a God had brought gifts of knowledge to men at awful
cost, than to sit serene in the vague belief that knowledge arrives
in incoherent particles, no one knows how and no one knows whence;
or that it is self-generated in a man here and there who gets out
of himself new insight into the motions of mind and heart, a new
perception of the laws of life, the hint of a new amelioration in
the condition of men.

Because the notion that we entertain of knowledge as being
heterogeneous lies at the root of our heterogeneous theories of
education, it may be as well to quote a passage from Ruskin’s
description of that picture in the chapel of the Church of Santa
Maria Novella to which I have referred:--

  “ ... On this side and the opposite side of the Chapel are
  represented by Simon Memmi’s hand, the teaching power of the
  Spirit of God and the saving power of the Christ of God in the
  world according to the understanding of Florence in his time.

  “We will take the side of intellect first. Beneath the pouring
  forth of the Holy Spirit in the point of the arch beneath are the
  three Evangelical Virtues. Without these, says Florence, you can
  have no science. Without Love, Faith and Hope--no intelligence.
  Under these are the four Cardinal Virtues ... Temperance,
  Prudence, Justice, Fortitude. Under these are the great Prophets
  and Apostles.... Under the line of Prophets, as powers summoned
  by their voices are the mythic figures of the seven theological
  or spiritual and the seven geological or natural sciences; and
  under the feet of each of them the figure of its Captain-teacher
  to the world.” (_Mornings in Florence._)

That is, the Florentines of the Middle Ages believed in “the
teaching power of the Spirit of God,” believed not only that
the seven Liberal Arts were fully under the direct outpouring
of the Holy Ghost, but that every fruitful idea, every original
conception, be it in geometry, or grammar, or music, was directly
derived from a Divine source.

Whether we receive it or not, and the Scriptures abundantly support
such a theory regarding the occurrence of knowledge, we cannot fail
to perceive that here we have a harmonious and ennobling scheme
of education and philosophy. It is a pity that the exigencies of
his immediate work prevented Ruskin from inquiring further into
the origin, the final source, of knowledge, but we may continue
the inquiry for ourselves. In “the teaching power of the Spirit
of God” we have a pregnant and inspiring phrase. Supposing that we
accept this mediæval philosophy tentatively for present relief,
what would be our gains?

First, the enormous relief afforded by a sense of unity of purpose,
of progressive evolution, in the education of the race. It induces
great ease of mind to think that knowledge is dealt out to us
according to our preparedness and according to our needs; that God
whispers in the ear of the man who is ready in order that he may be
the vehicle to carry the new knowledge to the rest of us. “God has
a few of us whom He whispers in the ear,” ‘Abt Vogler’ is made to
say; and another poet causes his Explorer to cry:--

  “God chose me for His whisper, and I’ve found it, and it’s yours!”

Next, that knowledge, in this light, is no longer sacred and
secular, great and trivial, practical and theoretical. All
knowledge, dealt out to us in such portions as we are ready for, is
sacred; knowledge is, perhaps, a beautiful whole, a great unity,
embracing God and man and the universe, but having many parts
which are not comparable with one another in the sense of less or
more, because all are necessary and each has its functions. Next,
we perceive that knowledge and the mind of man are to each other
as are air and the lungs. The mind lives by means of knowledge;
stagnates, faints, perishes, deprived of this necessary atmosphere.

That, it is not for a man to choose, “I will learn this or that,
the rest is not my concern”; still less is it for parent or
schoolmaster to limit a child to less than he can get at of the
whole field of knowledge; for, in the domain of mind at least
as much as in that of morals or religion, man is under a Divine
Master; he has to know as he has to eat.

That, there is not one period of life, our school days, in which
we sit down to regular meals of intellectual diet, but that we must
eat every day in order to live every day.

That, knowledge and what is known as “learning” are not to be
confounded; learning may still be an available store when it is
not knowledge; but by knowledge one grows, becomes more of a
person, and that is all that there is to show for it. We sometimes
wonder at the simplicity and modesty of persons whose knowledge
is matter of repute; but they are not hiding their light; they
are not aware of any unusual possessions; they have nothing to
show but themselves, but we feel the force of their personalities.
Now, forceful personalities, persons of weight and integrity, of
decision and sound judgment, are what the country is most in need
of; and, if we propose to bring such persons up for the public
service, the gradual inception of knowledge is one condition
amongst others.

There are various delightfully “new” educational systems in favour,
in all of which a grain of knowledge is presented in a gallon of
warm diluent. We have the theory that it does not matter what a
child learns, but only how he learns it; which is as sound as,
It does not matter what a child eats, but only how he eats it,
therefore feed him on sawdust! Then, we have Rousseau’s primitive
man theory, that a child must get all his knowledge through his own
senses and by his own wits, as if there were no knowledge waiting
to be passed on by the small torch-bearer; and there is the theory
which obtained in Catholic England, exemplified in more than one
of the Waverley Novels, in the sports purveyed for her tenantry
by ‘Lady Margaret Bellenden,’ for example. Those men and maidens
had been trained as children to be “supple, active, healthy, with
senses alert, ready for dance and song, with an eye and ear ready
for the beautiful, intelligent, happy, capable.” (I quote from a
valuable letter in _The Times_). What with our morris-dances,
pageants, living pictures, miracle plays, and so on, we are
reviving the Stuart educational ideals, and no doubt we do well to
aim at increasing the general joy. But our age requires more of us;
in the sort of self-activity and self-expression implied in these
and in half a dozen other educational theories, knowledge plays no
part, and the city _gamin_ exhibits in perfection every quality
of gaiety, alert intelligence, delight in shows, which we set
ourselves to cultivate.

“With all thy getting, get understanding,” is the message for our
needs, and understanding is, in one sense, the conscious act of the
mind in apprehending knowledge, which is in fact relative, and does
not exist for any person until that person’s mind acts upon the
intellectual matter presented to it. “Why will ye not understand?”
is the repeated and poignant question of the Gospels.

That is what ails us as a nation, we do not understand; not
ignorant persons only, but educated men and women, employ
fallacious arguments, offer prejudices for principles, and
platitudes for ideas. If it be argued that these failures are
due less to ignorance than to insincerity, I should reply that
insincerity is an outcome of ignorance; the darkened intelligence
cannot see clearly. “The day is unto them that know,” but knowledge
is by no means the facile acquirement of those who, according to
Ruskin, “cram to pass and not to know.”

I would not be understood as passing strictures upon the vast
and excellent educational work nearly all teachers are doing;
it is impossible to go into an Elementary School without being
impressed by the competence of the teachers and the intelligence
of the children; I have already paid a worthless tribute to Public
Schools, and should like here to add a word of affectionate
and hearty appreciation of the High School girl as I know her,
thoughtful and well educated--a person quite undeserving of the
slings and arrows of outrageous criticism too freely aimed at
her. As for our new Universities, they remove the stigma under
which many of us have suffered in presence of the numerous centres
of intellectual life which add dignity and grace to continental
cities. The new Universities are full of promise for the land.

We have, no doubt, arrived at a good starting place, but we may
not consider that the journey is accomplished. I need not repeat
the charges to which we have laid ourselves open because of our
ignorance, but I shall endeavour to take a closer survey of the
field of education as regarded from the standpoint of knowledge
and the innate affinities existing in the mind with that knowledge
which is proper for it. For the present the need is that “abstract
knowledge” should present itself to practical persons as the crying
demand of the nation; the “mandate,” let us say, pronounced by
certain general failures to understand the science of relations,
and that other neglected form of knowledge, “the science of the
proportion of things.”


V

EDUCATION AND THE FULLNESS OF LIFE

“I must live my life!” said the notorious bandit who before the War
terrorized Paris; and we have heard the sort of cant often, even
before _The Doll’s House_ gave to “self-expression” the dignity of
a cult; nevertheless, the brigand Bonnot has done an ill turn to
society, for a misguiding theory neatly put is more dangerous than
an ill-example.

We are tired of the man who claims to live his life at the general
expense, of the girl who will live hers to her family’s annoyance
or distress; but there really is a great opportunity open to the
nation which will set itself to consider what the life of a man
should be and will give each individual a chance to live his life.

We are doing something; we are trying to open the book of nature
to children by the proper key--knowledge, acquaintance by look and
name, if not more, with bird and flower and tree; we see, too,
that the magic of poetry makes knowledge vital, and children and
grown-ups quote a verse which shall add blackness to the ashbud,
tender wonder to that “flower in the crannied wall,” a thrill
to the song of the lark. As for the numerous field clubs of the
northern towns, the members of which, weavers, miners, artisans,
reveal themselves as accomplished botanists, birdmen, geologists,
their Saturday rambles mean not only “life,” but splendid joy. It
is to be hoped that the opportunities afforded in the schools will
prepare women to take more part in these excursions; at present the
work done is too thorough for their endurance and for their slight
attainments.

In another direction we are doing well; we are so made that
every dynamic relation, be it leap-frog or high-flying, which we
establish with Mother Earth, is a cause of joy; we begin to see
this and are encouraging swimming, dancing, hockey, and so on, all
instruments of present joy and permanent health. Again, we know
that the human hand is a wonderful and exquisite instrument to be
used in a hundred movements exacting delicacy, direction and force;
every such movement is a cause of joy as it leads to the pleasure
of execution and the triumph of success. We begin to understand
this and make some efforts to train the young in the deft handling
of tools and the practice of handicrafts. Some day, perhaps, we
shall see apprenticeship to trades revived, and good and beautiful
work enforced. In so far, we are laying ourselves out to secure
that each shall “live his life”; and that, not at his neighbour’s
expense; because, so wonderful is the economy of the world that
when a man really lives his life he benefits his neighbour as
well as himself; we all thrive in the well-being of each. We are
perceiving, too, that a human being is endowed with an ear attuned
to harmony and melody, with a voice from which music may issue,
hands whose delicate action may draw forth sounds in enthralling
sequence. With the ancient Greeks, we begin to realise that music
is a necessary part of education. So, too, of pictorial art; at
last we understand that every one can draw, and that, because to
draw is delightful, every one should be taught how; that every one
delights in pictures, and that education is concerned to teach him
what pictures to delight in.

A person may sing and dance, enjoy music and natural beauty, sketch
what he sees, have satisfaction in his own good craftsmanship,
labour with his hands at honest work, perceiving that work is
better than wages; may live his life in various directions, the
more the merrier. A certain pleasant play of the intellect attends
the doing of all these things; his mind is agreeably exercised;
he thinks upon what he is doing, often with excitement, sometimes
with enthusiasm. He says, “I must live my life,” and he lives it
in as many of these ways as are open to him; no other life is
impoverished to supply his fullness, but, on the contrary, the sum
of general joy in well-being is increased both through sympathy and
by imitation.

This is the sort of ideal that is obtaining in our schools and
in the public mind, so that the next generation bid fair to be
provided with many ways of living their lives, ways which do not
encroach upon the lives of others. Here is the contribution of our
generation to the science of education, and it is not an unworthy
one; we perceive that a person is to be brought up in the first
place for his own uses, and after that for the uses of society;
but, as a matter of fact, the person who “lives his life” most
completely is also of most service to others because he contains
within him provision for many serviceable activities which are
employed in living his life; and, besides, there is a negative
advantage to the community in the fact that the man is able to live
on his own resources.

But a man is not made up only of eyes to see, a heart to enjoy,
limbs delightful in the using, hands satisfied with perfect
execution: life in all these kinds is open more or less to all
but the idly depraved. But what of man’s eager, hungry, restless,
insatiable mind? True, we teach him the mechanical art of reading
while he is at school, but we do not teach him to read; he has
little power of attention, a poor vocabulary, little habit of
conceiving any life but his own; to add to the gate-money at a
football match is his notion of adventure and diversion.

We are, in fact, only taking count of the purlieus of that vast
domain which pertains to every man in right of his human nature.
We neglect mind. We need not consider brain; a duly nourished and
duly exercised mind takes care of its physical organ provided that
organ also receives its proper material nourishment. But our fault,
our exceeding great fault, is that we keep our own minds and the
minds of our children shamefully underfed. The mind is a spiritual
octopus, reaching out limbs in every direction to draw in enormous
rations of that which under the action of the mind itself becomes
knowledge. Nothing can stale its infinite variety; the heavens and
the earth, the past, the present, and future, things great and
things minute, nations and men, the universe, all are within the
scope of the human intelligence. But there would appear to be, as
we have seen, an unsuspected unwritten law concerning the nature of
the “material” which is converted into knowledge during the act of
apprehension. The idea of the _Logos_ did not come by chance to the
later Greeks; “The Word” is not a meaningless title applied to the
second Person of the Trinity; it is not without significance that
every utterance which fell from Him is marked by exquisite literary
fitness; (a child’s comment on a hymn that was read to her was,
“that is not poetry; Jesus would have said it _much_ better”);
in rendering an account of His august commission Christ said:--“I
have given unto them _the words_ which Thou gavest me”; and one
disciple voiced the rest when he said, “Thou hast _the words_ of
eternal life.” The Greeks knew better than we that words are more
than things, more than events; with all primitive peoples rhetoric
appears to have been a power; the grand old sayings which we have
scorned as inventions are coming to their own again, because, what
modern is capable of such inventions? Men move the world, but the
motives which move men are conveyed by words. Now, a person is
limited by the number of things he is able to call by their names,
qualify by appropriate epithets; this is no mere pedantic ruling,
it belongs to that unfathomable mystery we call human nature; and
the modern notion of education, with its shibboleth of “things
not words,” is intrinsically demoralizing. The human intelligence
demands letters, literature, with a more than bread-hunger. It is
almost within living memory how the newly emancipated American
negroes fell upon books as the famished Israelites fell upon food
in the deserted camp of Sennacherib.

Only as he has been and is nourished upon books is a man able to
“live his life.” A great deal of mechanical labour is necessarily
performed in solitude; the miner, the farm-labourer, cannot think
all the time of the block he is hewing, the furrow he is ploughing;
how good that he should be figuring to himself the trial scene in
the _Heart of Midlothian_, the “high-jinks” in _Guy Mannering_,
that his imagination should be playing with ‘Ann Page’ or ‘Mrs.
Quickly,’ or that his labour goes the better “because his secret
soul a holy strain repeats.” People, working people, do these
things. Many a one can say out of a rich experience, “My mind to me
a kingdom is”; many a one cries with Browning’s ‘Paracelsus,’ “God!
Thou art mind! Unto the master-mind, Mind should be precious.
Spare my mind alone!” We know how “_Have mynde_” appears on the
tiles paving the choir of St. Cross; but “_mynde_” like body, must
have its meat.

Faith has grown feeble in these days, hope faints in our heavy
ways, but charity waxes strong; we would make all men millionaires
if we could, or, at any rate, take from the millionaires to give
to the multitude. No doubt some beneficent and venturous Robin
Hood of a minister will arise (has arisen?) to take steps in
that direction; but when all has been done in the way of social
amelioration we shall not have enabled men to “live their lives”
unless we have given them a literary education of such sort that
they choose to continue in the pleasant places of the mind. “That
is all very well in theory,” some one objects, “but look at the
Masses, are they able to receive Letters? When they talk it is in
journalese, and anything in the nature of a book must be watered
down and padded to suit their comprehension.” But is it not true
that working men talk in “journalese” because it is only the
newspapers that do them the grace to meet them frankly on their
own level? Neither school education nor life has put books in
their way, and their adoption of the only literary speech that
offers but proves a natural aptitude for Letters. One cannot always
avoid appeal to the authority one knows to be final, and I will
not apologise for citing the fact at which no doubt we have all
wondered that Christ should expose the profoundest philosophy to
the multitude, the “Many,” whom even Socrates contemns.

May I quote, with apologies to the writer, a letter signed “A
Working Man,” written in answer to one of mine which was honoured
by being reprinted in _The Times Weekly Edition_? (It is good, by
the way, that such a journal should be in the hands of working
men). My correspondent “thanks Heaven that there are still a few
persons left in this country who regard education as somewhat
different from a means of _keeping a shop_.” We may all thank
Heaven that there are working men who value knowledge for its own
sake and hate to have it presented to them as a means of getting on.

The fact is, Letters make a universal appeal because they respond
to certain innate affinities: young Tennysons, De Quinceys, and
the like, are, as we all know, inordinate readers, but these are
capable of foraging on their own account; it is for the average,
the dull, and the backward boy I would lay urgent claim to a
literary education; the minds of such as these respond to this
and to no other appeal, and they turn out perfectly intelligent
persons, open to knowledge by many avenues. For working men whose
intelligence is in excess of their education, Letters are the
accessible vehicle of knowledge; having learned the elements of
reading, writing, and summing, it is unnecessary to trouble them
with any other “beggarly elements”; their natural intelligence and
mature minds make them capable of dealing with difficulties as they
occur; and for further elucidation every working men’s club should
have an encyclopædia. Some men naturally take to learning, and
will struggle manfully with their Latin grammar, and Cicero, their
Euclid and trigonometry. Happy they! But the general conclusion
remains, that for men and women of all ages, all classes, and
all complexions of mind, Letters are an imperative and daily
requirement to satisfy that universal mind-hunger, the neglect of
which gives rise to emotional disturbances, and, as a consequence,
to evils that dismay us.


VI

KNOWLEDGE IN LITERARY FORM

I have so far urged that knowledge is necessary to men, and that,
in the initial stages, it must be conveyed through a literary
medium, whether it be knowledge of physics or of Letters, because
there would seem to be some inherent quality in mind which prepares
it to respond to this form of appeal and no other. I say in the
initial stages, because possibly, when the mind becomes conversant
with knowledge of a given type, it unconsciously translates the
driest formulæ into living speech; perhaps it is for some such
reason that mathematics seem to fall outside this rule of literary
presentation; mathematics, like music, is a speech in itself, a
speech irrefragably logical, of exquisite clarity, meeting the
requirements of mind.

To consider Letters as the staple of education is no new thing; nor
is the suggestion new that to turn a young person into a library
is to educate him. But here we are brought to a stand; the mind
demands method, orderly presentation, as inevitably as it demands
knowledge; and it may be that our educational misadventures are due
to the fact that we have allowed ourselves to take up any haphazard
ordering that is recommended with sufficient pertinacity.

But no one can live without a philosophy which points out the
order, means and end of effort, intellectual or other; to fail
in discovering this is to fall into melancholia, or more active
madness: so we go about picking up a maxim here, a motto there,
an idea elsewhere, and make a patchwork of the whole which we
call our principles; beggarly fragments enough we piece together
to cover our nakedness and a hundred phrases which one may hear
any day betray lives founded upon an ignoble philosophy. No doubt
people are better than their words, better than their own thoughts;
we speak of ourselves as “finite beings,” but is there any limit
to the generosity and nobility of almost any person? The hastily
spoken “It is the rule at sea,” that distressed us a while ago,
what a vista does it disclose of chivalric tenderness, entire
self-sacrifice! Human nature has not failed; what has failed us is
philosophy, and that applied philosophy which is called education.
Philosophy, all the philosophies, old and new, land us on the horns
of a dilemma; either we do well by ourselves and seek our own
perfection of nature or condition, or we do well by others to our
own loss or deterioration. If there is a mean, philosophy does not
declare it.

There are things of which we have desperate need: we want a
new scale of values: I suppose we all felt when, in those days
before the War, we read how several millionaires went down in
the “Titanic” disaster, not only that their millions did not
matter, but that they did not matter to them; that possibly they
felt themselves well quit of an incessant fatigue. We want more
life: there is not life enough for our living; we have no great
engrossing interests; we hasten from one engagement to another and
glance furtively at the clock to see how time, life, is getting
on; we triumph if a week seems to have passed quickly; who knows
but that the approach of an inevitable end might find us glad to
get it all over? We want hope: we busy ourselves excitedly about
some object of desire, but the pleasure we get is in effort,
not in attainment; and we read, before the War, of the number
of suicides among Continental schoolboys, for instance, with
secret understanding; what is there to live for? We want to be
governed: servants like to receive their “orders”; soldiers and
schoolboys enjoy discipline; there is satisfaction in stringent
Court etiquette; the fact of being “under orders” adds dignity
to character. When we revolt it is only that we may transfer our
allegiance. We want a new start: we are sick of ourselves and of
knowing in advance how we shall behave and how we shall feel on
all occasions; the change we half-unconsciously desire is to other
aims, other ways of looking at things. We feel that we are more
than there is room for; other conditions might give us room; we
don’t know; any way, we are uneasy. These are two or three of the
secret matters that oppress us, and we are in need of a philosophy
which shall deal with such things of the spirit. We believe we
should be able to rise to its demands, however exigeant, for the
failure is not in us or in human nature so much as in our limited
knowledge of conditions.

The cry of decadence is dispiriting, but is it well-founded? The
beautiful little gowns that have come down as heirlooms would
not fit the “divinely tall” daughters of many a house where
they are treasured. We have become frank, truthful, kind; our
conscientiousness and our charity are morbid; we cannot rest in
our beds for a disproportionate anxiety for the well-being of
everybody; we even exceed the generous hazard, that, peradventure
for a good man one might be found to die; almost any man will risk
his life for the perishing without question of good or bad; and we
expect no less from firemen, doctors, life-boatmen, parsons, the
general public. And what a comment on the splendid magnanimity of
men does the War afford!

An annoying inquiry concerning risks at sea almost resulted in a
ruling that no one should let himself be saved so long as others
were in danger; it is preposterous, but is what human nature
expects of itself. No, we are not decadent on the whole, and our
uneasiness is perhaps caused by growing pains. We may be poor
things, but we are ready to break forth into singing should the
chance open to us of a full life of passionate devotion. Now, all
our exigeant demands are met by words written in a Book, and by the
manifestations of a Person; and we are waiting for a Christianity
such as the world has not yet known. Hitherto, Christ has existed
for our uses; but what if a time were coming when we, also,
should taste the “orientall fragrancie” of, “My Master!” So it
shall be when the shout of a King is among us, and are there not
premonitions? But these things come not by prayer and fasting, by
good works and self-denial, alone; there is something prior to all
these upon which our Master insists with distressful urgency, “Why
will ye not know? Why will ye not understand?”

My excuse for touching upon our most intimate concerns is that this
matter, too, belongs to the domain of Letters; if we propose to
seek knowledge we must proceed in an orderly way, recognising that
the principal knowledge is of most importance; the present writer
writes and the reader reads, because we are all moved by the spirit
of our time; these things are our secret preoccupation, for we have
come out of a long alienation as persons “wearied with trifles,”
and are ready and anxious for a new age. We know the way, and we
know where to find our rule of the road; but we must bring a new
zeal and a new method to our studies; we may no longer dip here
and there or read a perfunctory chapter with a view to find some
word of counsel or comfort for our use. We are engaged in the study
of, in noting the development of, that consummate philosophy which
meets every occasion of our lives, all demands of the intellect,
every uneasiness of the soul.

The arrogance which pronounces judgment upon the written “Word”
upon so slight an acquaintance as would hardly enable us to
cover a sheet or two of paper with sayings of the Master, which
confines the Divine teaching to the great Sermon, of which we are
able to rehearse some half-dozen sentences, is as absurd as it is
blameworthy. Let us give at least as profound attention to the
teaching of Christ as the disciples of Plato, say, gave to his
words of wisdom. Let us observe, note-book in hand, the orderly and
progressive sequence, the penetrating quality, the irresistible
appeal, the unique content of the Divine teaching; (for this
purpose it might be well to use some one of the approximately
chronological arrangements of the Gospel History in the words of
the text). Let us read, not for our profiting, though that will
come, but for love of that knowledge which is better than thousands
of gold and silver. By and by we perceive that this knowledge is
the chief thing in life; the meaning of Christ’s saying, “Behold,
I make all things new,” dawns upon us; we get new ideas as to the
relative worth of things; new vigour, new joy, new hope are ours.

If we believe that knowledge is the principal thing, that knowledge
is tri-partite, and that the fundamental knowledge is the knowledge
of God, we shall bring up our children as students of Divinity and
shall pursue our own life-long studies in the same school. Then we
shall find that the weekly sermons for which we are prepared are as
bread to the hungry; and we shall perhaps understand how enormous
is the demand we make upon the clergy for living, original thought.
It is only as we are initiated that science and “Nature” come to
our aid in this chief pursuit; then, they “their great Original
proclaim”; but while we are ignorant of the principal knowledge
they remain dumb. Literature and history have always great matters
to speak of or suggest, because they deal with states or phases of
moral government and moral anarchy, and tacitly indicate to us the
sole key to all this unintelligible world; and literature not only
reveals to us the deepest things of the human spirit, but it is
profitable also “for example of life and instruction in manners.”

We are at the parting of the ways; our latest educational
authority, one who knows and loves little children, would away
with all tales and histories that appeal to the imagination;
let children learn by means of things, is her mandate; and the
charm and tenderness with which it is delivered may well blind us
to its desolating character. We recognise Rousseau, of course,
and his _Emile_, that self-sufficient person who should know
nothing of the past, should see no visions, allow no authority.
But human nature in children is stronger than the eighteenth
century philosopher and the theories which he continues to inform.
Whoever has told a fairy tale to a child has been made aware of
that natural appetency for letters to which it is our business
to minister. Are we not able to believe that words are more than
meat, and, so believing, shall we not rise up and insist that
children shall have a liberal diet of the spirit? Rousseau, in
spite of false analogies, fallacious arguments, was able to summon
fashionable mothers and men of the world throughout Europe to the
great task of education, because his eloquence convinced them that
this was their assigned work and a work capable of achievement;
and we who perhaps see with clearer eyes should do well to cherish
this legacy--the conviction that the education of the succeeding
generation is the chief business of every age.

Nevertheless, though we are ourselves emerging from the slough
of materialism, we are willing to plunge children into its heavy
ways through the agency of a “practical” and “useful” education;
but children have their rights, and among these is the freedom
of the city of mind. Let them use things, know things, learn
through things, by all means; but the more they know Letters the
better they will be able, with due instruction, to handle things.
I do not hesitate to say that the whole of a child’s instruction
should be conveyed through the best literary medium available. His
history books should be written with the lucidity, concentration,
personal conviction, directness, and admirable simplicity which
characterizes a work of literary calibre. So should his geography
books; the so-called scientific method of teaching geography now
in vogue is calculated to place a child in a somewhat priggish
relation to Mother Earth; it is impossible, too, that the human
intelligence should assimilate the sentences one meets with in
many books for children, but the memory retains them and the child
is put in the false attitude of one who offers pseudo-knowledge.
Most of the geography books, for example, require to be translated
into terms of literature before they can be apprehended. Great
confidence is placed in diagrammatic and pictorial representation,
and it is true that children enjoy diagrams and understand them
as they enjoy and understand puzzles; but there is apt to be
in their minds a great gulf between the diagram and the fact
it illustrates. We trust much to pictures, lantern slides,
cinematograph displays; but without labour there is no profit, and
probably the pictures which remain with us are those which we have
first conceived through the medium of words; pictures may help us
to correct our notions, but the imagination does not work upon a
visual presentation; we lay the phrases of a description on our
palette and make our own pictures; (works of art belong to another
category). We recollect how Dr. Arnold was uneasy until he got
details enough to form a mental picture of a place new to him. So
it is with children and all persons of original mind: a map to put
the place in position, and then, all about it, is what we want.

Readings in literature, whether of prose or poetry, should
generally illustrate the historical period studied; but selections
should be avoided; children should read the whole book or the whole
poem to which they are introduced. Here we are confronted by a
serious difficulty. Plato, we know, determined that the poets in
his “Republic” should be well looked after lest they should write
matter to corrupt the morals of youth; aware of what happened in
Europe when the flood-gates of knowledge were opened, Erasmus was
anxiously solicitous on this score, and it is a little surprising
to find that here, Rossetti was on the side of the angels. Will
the publishers, who, since Friedrich Perthes discovered their
educational mission, have done so much for the world, help us
in this matter also? They must excise with a most sparing hand,
always under the guidance of a jealous scholar; but what an ease
of conscience it would be to teachers if they could throw open the
world of books to their scholars without fear of the mental and
moral smudge left by a single prurient passage! Many, too, who have
taken out their freedom in the republic of letters would be well
content to keep complete library editions in costly bindings in
their proper place, while handy volumes in daily use might be left
about without uneasiness.

The Old Testament itself after such a (very guarded) process would
be more available for the reading of children; and few persons
would feel that Shakespeare’s plays suffered from the removal
of obscenities here and there. In this regard we cherish a too
superstitious piety. In another matter, let that great “remedial
thinker,” Dr. Arnold, advise us:--“Adjust your proposed amount of
reading to your time and inclination; but whether that amount be
large or small let it be varied in its kind and widely varied. If
I have a confident opinion on any one point connected with the
improvement of the human mind it is on this.” Here we get support
for a varied and liberal curriculum; and, as a matter of fact, we
find that the pupil who studies a number of subjects knows them as
well as he who studies a few knows those few.

Children should read books, not about books and about authors;
this sort of reading may be left for the spare hours of the
dilettante. Their reading should be carefully ordered, for the
most part in historical sequence; they should read to _know_,
whether it be _Robinson Crusoe_ or Huxley’s _Physiography_; their
knowledge should be tested, not by questions, but by the oral (and
occasionally the written) reproduction of a passage after one
reading; all further processes that we concern ourselves about in
teaching, the mind performs for itself; and, lastly, this sort of
reading should be the chief business in the class room.

We are at a crucial moment in the history of English education.
John Bull is ruminating. He says, “I have laboured at the higher
education of women; let them back to the cooking-pot and distaff
and learn the science (!) of domestic economy. I have tried for
these forty years to educate the children of the people. What is
the result? Strikes and swelled head! Let them have ’prentice
schools and learn what will be their business in life!” John Bull
is wrong. In so far as we have failed it is that we have offered
the pedantry, the mere verbiage, of knowledge in lieu of knowledge
itself; and it is time for all who do not hold knowledge in
contempt to be up and doing; there is time yet to save England and
to make of her a greater nation, more worthy of her opportunities.
But the country of our love will not stand still; if we let the
people sink into the mire of a material education our doom is
sealed; eyes now living will see us take even a third-rate place
among the nations, for it is knowledge that exalteth a nation,
because out of duly-ordered knowledge proceedeth righteousness and
prosperity ensueth.

“Think clear, feel deep, bear fruit well,” says our once familiar
mentor, Matthew Arnold, and his monition exactly meets our needs.




SUPPLEMENTARY

TOO WIDE A MESH


“The wide world dreaming on things to come” is concentrating on a
luminous figure of education which it beholds, dimly, emerging from
a cloudy horizon. This gracious presence is to change the world,
to give to all men wider possibilities, other thoughts, aims: but,
alas, this Education which is to be open to all promises no more
on a nearer view than to make Opportunity universal--that is, in
spiritual things, he may take who has the power and he may keep who
can.

The net is cast wide no doubt and brings in a mighty haul but the
meshes are so wide that it will only retain big fishes. Now this is
the history of education since the world was and is no new thing.
The mediæval schools of castle or abbey, the Renaissance schools,
the very schools of China, have all been conducted upon this
plan. Education is for him who wants it and can take it but is no
universal boon like the air we breathe or the sunshine we revel in.

We are a little sorry for the effect of this limitation upon the
‘working classes’: only a small percentage of the children of these
are ‘big’ enough to be retained in the examination net which, to
do it justice, explores all waters. A few of the pass men may do
big things and fill big posts, but for the rest, a large percentage
is, in practice, illiterate except for the spelling out of a local
‘rag’ for football and parish news.

But is the mischief confined to what we call the ‘working
classes’? Is it not a fact that in most schools the full force
of instruction is turned on upon a few boys who are likely to
distinguish themselves? While for the rest of the school teaching
is duly given no doubt but the boys find they may take it or leave
it as the humour takes them.

We were all fascinated a while ago by the story of a pair of
charming ‘Twins’; these went through the usual preparatory school
education and then passed on to a great Public School where they
remained until they were nineteen; that is, they had ten or twelve
good years among most excellent opportunities. As they were
attractive boys we may take it that their masters were not at any
rate unwilling to teach them. Their record should have been quite
a good one, and, though it is the fashion to sneer a little at
Public Schools, we know that these have turned out and do turn
out the best and most intellectual men the country has occasion
for. Therefore what happened in the case of these ‘Twins’ does
not cast any reflection upon Public Schools but solely upon the
system of the Big Mesh. Here are some of the things we read in that
delightful biography:--

  “While in hospital after a smash at polo R---- wrote to
  F----:--‘I enjoyed it immensely. What lucky people we are taking
  an interest in so many things!’”

Surely here was material for a schoolmaster to work upon! Again, we
read:--

  “They never ceased to wonder at the magnificence of the world and
  they carried a divine innocence into soldiering and travel and
  sport and business and, not least,--into the shadows of the Great
  War.”

And this ‘wonder’ of theirs was the note that marked them at
school. Again, what material for their instructors!

  “But,” we read, “at X---- they showed little interest in books
  and, later, were wont to lament to each other that ‘_They had
  left school wholly uneducated._’” (The italics are ours.)

Their kindly biographer and dear friend goes on to say:--

  “But they learnt other things,--the gift of leadership, for
  instance, and the power of getting alongside all varieties of
  human nature.”

But was not this nature rather than nurture, school nurture at any
rate, for these gifts seem to have been a family inheritance? Born
in 1880, they left school in 1899, when there follows a delightful
record for the one brother of successful and adventurous sport
while--

  “R---- was soon absorbed in the city ... and beginning to lament
  his want of education.” “F----, while in Egypt was greatly
  impressed by Lord Cromer and writes to R----, ‘he is quite the
  biggest man we have!... to hear him talk is worth hearing.’”

The two brothers correspond constantly and R---- takes the part
of mentor to his brother. He advises him to learn _The Times_
leaders by heart to improve his style,--“because they are very good
English.” Again,--

  “I will send you out next mail a very good book, _Science and
  Education_, by Professor Huxley which I have marked in several
  places, the sort of book you can read over again.” R---- “had
  discovered that he was very badly educated and was determined to
  remedy this defect:--‘It don’t matter ... I do believe not having
  learned at X---- so long as one does so now.’”

See the fine loyalty of the young man; his failures were not to be
put down to his school!

If the schools take credit for any one thing it is that they show
their pupils ‘how to learn’; but do they? We are told that R----
set to work at a queer assortment of books and writes to F----:--

  “Anyone can improve his memory: the best way is by learning by
  heart--no matter what--and then when you think you know it,
  say it or write it.... After two or three days you are sure to
  forget it again and then instead of looking at the book ‘strain
  your mind’ and try to remember it. Above all things always keep
  your mind employed. One great man (I forget which) used to see
  a number on a door, say 69, and tried to remember all that had
  happened in the years ending in 69. Or, see a horse and remember
  how many you have seen that day.... Asquith always learns things
  by heart, he never wastes a minute; as soon as he has nothing to
  do he picks up some book. He reads till 1-30 every night. When
  driving to the Temple next morning he thinks over what he has
  read. Result: he has a marvellous memory and knows everything.”

Think of the Herculean labours the poor fellow set for both himself
and his brother! They ran an intellectual race across a ploughed
field after heavy rain and the marvel is that they made way at
all. Yet these two brothers had sufficient intellectual zeal to
have made them great men as Ambassadors, Governors of Dominions,
Statesmen, what not; whereas so far as things of the mind go, they
spent their days in a hopeless struggle, alert for any indication
which might help them to make up lee-way, and all because,
according to their own confession, they ‘had learned nothing at
school.’ Here are further indications of R----’s labours in the
field of knowledge:--

  “I am reading Rosebery’s _Napoleon_ and will send it to you.
  What a wonder he was! Never spent a moment of his life without
  learning something.... I enclose an essay from Bacon’s book.
  Learn it by heart if you can. I have and think it a clinker....
  I have also finished _Life of Macaulay_. I have always wondered
  how our great politicians and literary chaps live.... I also
  send you a Shakespeare. I learnt Antony’s harangue to the Romans
  after Cæsar’s death; I am also trying to learn a little about
  electricity and railroad organization, so have my time filled
  up. _Pickwick Papers_ I also send to you. I have always avoided
  this sort of books but Dickens’ works are miles funnier than the
  rotten novels one sees.... I have learnt one thing by my reading
  and my conversation with Professors,--_you and I go at a subject
  all wrong_.” (Italics ours.)

These letters are pathetic documents and, that they are reassuring
also, let us be thankful. They do go to prove that the desire of
knowledge is inextinguishable whatever schools do or leave undone;
but have these nothing to answer for when a pursuit which should
yield ever recurring refreshment becomes dogged labour over heavy
roads with little pleasure in progress?

Here, again, is another evidence of the limitations attending an
utter absence of education. A cultivated sense of humour is a
great factor in a joyous life, but these young men are without it.
Perhaps the youth addicted to sports usually fails to appreciate
delicate nonsense; sports are too strenuous to admit of a subtler,
more airy kind of play and we read:--

  “R---- heard Mr. Balfour and Lord Reay praising _Alice in
  Wonderland_. Deeply impressed he bought the book as soon as he
  returned to London and read it earnestly. To his horror he saw
  no sense in it. Then it struck him that it might be meant as
  nonsense and he had another try, when he concluded that it was
  rather funny but he remained disappointed.”

We need not follow the career of these interesting men further.
Both fell early before they were forty. Their fine qualities
and their personal fascination remained with them to the end,
as did also, alas, their invincible ignorance. They laboured
indefatigably, but, as R---- remarked,--“You and I go at a subject
all wrong!”

The schools must tell us why men who attained mediocre successes
and the personal favour due to charming manners and sweet natures
were yet somewhat depressed and disappointed on account of the
ignorance which they made blind and futile efforts to correct; but
they never got so far as to learn that knowledge is delightful
_because one likes it_; and that no effort at self-education can
do anything until one has found out this supreme delightfulness of
knowledge.

It must be noted that this failure of a great school to fulfil its
purpose occurred twenty years ago, and that no educational body has
made more well-considered and enlightened advances than have the
Headmasters of the great Public Schools. Probably that delightful
group of Eton boys in _Coningsby_ has always been and is to-day
typical; there is a certain knightly character in the fine bearing
and intelligent countenances of the Head Boys one comes across
there which speaks well for their intellectual activity. The
question is whether more might not be done with the average boy.

The function of the schools is no doubt to feed their scholars on
knowledge until they have created in them a healthy appetite which
they will go on satisfying for themselves day by day throughout
life. We must give up the farce of teaching young people how to
learn, which is just as felicitous a labour and just as necessary
as to teach a child the motions of eating without offering him
food; and studies which are pursued with a view to improve the mind
must in future take a back seat.

The multitudinous things that every person wants to know must
be made accessible in the schoolroom, not by diagrams, digests,
and abstract principles; but boys and girls, like ‘Kit’s little
brother,’ must learn ‘what oysters is’ by supping on oysters. There
is absolutely no avenue to knowledge but knowledge itself, and
the schools must begin, not by qualifying the mind to deal with
knowledge, but by affording all the best books containing all the
sorts of knowledge which these ‘Twins,’ like everyone else, wanted
to know. We have to face two difficulties. We do not believe in
children as intellectual persons nor in knowledge as requisite and
necessary for intellectual life. It is a pity that education is
conducted _in camera_ save for the examination lists which shew
how the best pupils in a school have acquitted themselves, the
half-dozen or dozen best in a big school. Finely conscientious as
teachers are they can hardly fail to give undue importance to their
group of candidates for examination and a school of four or five
hundred stands or falls by a dozen head boys.

  [See note under Table of Contents for (_a_) the large number of
  children’s answers, and (_b_) Book IV of which only Chapter 1
  appears in this volume].




Index


  abridged editions, 183

  _Abt Vogler_, 324

  academic solution of educational problems, the, 254, 288

  Academy (French), 252, 256

  _Across the Bridges_, by A. Paterson, 118, 119, 300

  act of knowing, 99, 254, 271, 292, 298;
    knowledge acquired by, 291

  Adams, Professor John, 112

  æsthetic sense, 43;
    open to disaster, 56

  affections, mis-directed, 58

  Albrecht, Dr., 162

  allusions, literary, 264

  Ambleside, 212, 217

  _Ambleside Geography, The_, 226-229

  Amyot, on history, 273

  anarchy, 69

  ‘Angelic Doctor,’ The, 284

  ‘aniseed drops,’ educational, 302

  _aphasia_, our national, 269

  ‘appetency,’ 56, 107

  apprenticeship, 328

  architecture, 77, 217, 220

  arithmetic, 59, 73, 141, 151, 152, 230-233

  Armstrong, Dr., 280

  Arnold, Dr., 257, 340, 341

  Arnold, Matthew, 239, 252, 258, 309, 315, 342

  art, xxx, 14, 43, 45, 63, 154, 157, 254;
    teaching of, 213-217, 275;
    is of the spirit, 214;
    power of appreciating, 214;
    reverent knowledge of, 214

  Arthur, King, 28

  assimilation, 259

  astronomy, 50, 220, 222

  Astrophel, 100

  athleticism and mental activity, 72

  atmosphere, education is an, xxix, 94-99

  attention, 259;
    a habit, 100;
    a natural function, 171;
    how secured, 13-15, 17, 28, 45, 76, 255;
    must not have crutches, 258;
    power of, present in children, xxxi, 7, 14, 18, 76, 154, 171, 255,
        263, 290;
    the hall-mark of an educated person, 99;
    the prime agent in education, 16, 76, 247;
    weakened by efforts to memorise, 17;
    unfailing, 17, 171, 291

  _Aus Meinem Leben_ (Goethe), 161

  Austen, Jane, 16, 77, 193, 294

  authority, natural, necessary and fundamental, xxix, 68-78, 97, 134;
    deputed, 68;
    the condition of liberty, 69;
    order, outcome of, 69;
    chastened, 71;
    _vide_ self-authority

  average boy, the, 300, 310, 312


  Bacon, 7, 29, 61, 105, 124, 143

  _Barnaby Rudge_, 259, 282

  ‘Baron of Bradwardine,’ the, 312

  Bergson, Henri, 173

  Bernhardi, F. von, 3

  Bible, The, 143, 186, 272, 273;
    in curriculum, 30, 40, 61-65, 160-165, 254;
    fine English of, 160, 309;
    method of, lesson, 159-169;
    and critical teaching, 163

  Big Mesh, The system of the, 344

  biology, 221

  Blake, William, 79

  Board of Education, 250

  body, well-being of, 46;
    a sound, 189

  Bompas Smith, Professor, 27

  Bonnot, 327

  books, many, xxx, 7, 12, 15, 30, 59, 76, 267, 271, 303;
    living, xxx, 303;
    worthy, 12, 18, 26, 52, 75, 104, 191, 260, 268;
    delight in, 28;
    text-books, 50, 53, 105, 256, 263, 271, 275;
    difficulty of choosing, 187, 248;
    choice of, 248, 272;
    P.U.S., tested by examinations, 248;
    ‘classes’ and ‘masses’ must read the same, 264;
    about books, 341

  Bosanquet, Bernard, 149

  Bose, Professor Sir Jagadis Chandra, 95

  botany, 220, 221

  brain, adaptation of, to habits, xxx, 101;
    thought not a function of, 2, 4, 260;
    subject to same conditions as body, 38;
    should not know fatigue, 38;
    mind takes care of, 330

  British Association, The, 222, 251

  British Museum, The, 77, 175, 176, 274

  Browning, Robert, 100, 133, 215, 331

  Büchner, 4

  Burns, John, 300

  _Bushido_, 133


  ‘Caleb Garth,’ 61

  ‘Caleb Balderstone,’ 314

  Carlyle, Thomas, 238, 288

  Catechism, The, 169

  Cavell, Nurse, 77, 141

  Character, the one achievement possible, 129;
    more important than conduct, 129;
    formation of, 264, 278;
    magnanimity of, 248

  Charles IX, 50

  chemistry, 254

  _Childe Harold_ (Byron), 186

  child-garden, 24

  children, waiting for call of knowledge, xxv;
    are born persons, xxix, 13, 18, 29, 36, 80, 238;
    have good and evil tendencies, xxix, 47-49, 52, 61, 66, 85, 86,
        88, 89;
    must live under natural conditions, xxix, 96-99;
    have appetite for knowledge, xxx, 10, 11-13, 14, 18, 29, 44, 53,
        58, 62, 77, 89, 91, 124;
    can deal with knowledge, xxx, 10, 14, 18, 40, 72, 109, 117, 154,
        237, 263;
    require much and various knowledge, xxx, 11, 12, 14, 19, 25, 72,
        109, 111, 116, 125, 154, 157, 253, 256, 263, 288-290;
    and in literary form, xxxi, 13, 17, 18, 29, 30, 51, 92, 109, 154,
        160, 172, 218, 248, 256, 260, 291;
    have power of attention, xxxi, 7, 14, 18, 29, 75, 154, 171, 255,
        263, 291;
    enormous educability of, xxxi;
    must have principles of conduct, xxxi, 62;
    must have responsibility of learning, 6, 74, 99;
    have powers common to _all_, 8;
    backward, 9, 62, 183, 245, 255, 291;
    are ignorant, 10;
    have imagination, 10, 18, 36, 41, 50;
    and judgment, 10, 18;
    hindered by apparatus of teacher, 11, 54;
    made apathetic by spiritual malnutrition, 11, 54;
    must have great thoughts, 12, 40;
    must read many books, xxx, 7, 12, 15, 30, 59, 76, 267, 271, 303;
    must read to know, 13, 99;
    are bored by talk, 15, 19, 41, 44, 52, 58;
    intellectual capacity of, belittled, 26, 31, 75, 81, 158, 192,
        238, 246;
    are not all alike, 30, 241;
    first notions of, 35;
    and language, 35;
    early thoughts of, 36, 238;
    experience what they hear and read, 40;
    hearts of, thoroughly furnished, 43, 60;
    of the slums, 44, 63, 256, 260, 293;
    all, persons of infinite possibilities, 44, 156;
    start fair, 47;
    muscles and nerves of, 48;
    have power to sense meaning, 51, 181;
    not intellectual ruminants, 53;
    dangers of feeding, morally, 59;
    must think fairly, 61;
    capacity and needs of, 66, 157;
    and the sense of ‘must,’ 73;
    offences against, 81;
    must be relieved of decisions, 97;
    need bracing, not too stimulating, atmosphere, 98;
    should not ‘run wild,’ 98;
    must form good habits, 100;
    grow upon ideas, 109;
    should know something of their own capacities, 131, 187, 189;
    must follow arguments and detect fallacies, 147;
    must know what religion is, 149;
    educational rights of, 157, 339;
    howlers of _v._ mistakes, 158, 256;
    have affinity for God, 158;
    able for school education at five, but no conscious mental effort
        desirable until six, 159;
    examination answers of, 167, 168, 185, 191, 193, 194, 195-209,
        244;
    enjoy classical names, 181;
    must see life whole, 187;
    must learn science of proportion, 187;
    chastely taught, watch their thoughts, 188;
    do not generalise, 224;
    devitalised, 237;
    not products of education or environment, 238;
    not incomplete beings, but ignorant, 238;
    powers of, 9, 238, 255;
    shown in verses, 242-243;
    offer a resisting medium, 253;
    need physical and mechanical training, 255;
    beings ‘of large discourse,’ 305;
    should be persons of leisure, 305

  China, schools of, 343

  Chinese Empire, 179

  Christ, parables of, 304;
    gave profoundest philosophy to the multitude, 332;
    does not exist for our uses only, 336;
    teaching of, must receive profound attention, 337

  Christianity, 336

  Chrysostom, St., Prayer of, 64

  cinematograph displays, 340

  Circe, 186, 267

  _Citizens to Be_, by Miss M. L. V. Hughes, 235

  citizenship, 185-189, 254, 274;
    the inspiration of, 185;
    ancillary to history, 185;
    problem of good and evil in, 186

  Cizek, Herr, 216

  Coleridge, S. T., 35, 56, 105-108, 110, 233, 290, 318, 322

  Colet, Dean, xxvi, 247

  Collingwood, Lord, 60

  Comenius, 8, 20, 291

  composition, 190-209;
    oral, 190, 269;
    art of, should not be taught, 190, 192, 269;
    not an adjunct of education, 192;
    in verse, 193, 242;
    definite teaching of, in Forms V and VI, 193, 194;
    power of, innate in children, 191;
    written, 192;
    comes of free and exact use of books, 193;
    children’s, 195-209

  concentration, 8, 15;
    innate, 171

  _Coningsby_, 348

  conscience, present in infant, 37;
    governing power of man, 131

  _Continuation Schools_, edited by Sir Michael Sadler, 285

  Continuation Schools, a Liberal Education in, 119, 124, 127, 147;
    the scope of, 279-299;
    movement and technical education, 279;
    not for technical instruction, but for things of the mind, 287

  Copenhagen, 285

  Copts, 314

  Cornwell, Jack, 141

  correlation, principle of, 276

  correlation lessons, 114, ff.

  Council Schools, P.U.S. work in, xxv, 77, 81, 181, 182, 195, 241,
        290, 293

  ‘countenance,’ a manifestation of thought, 301

  ‘Creakle, Mr.’ 81, 101

  Curie, Madame, 141

  curriculum, a full, xxx, 14, 19, 30, 154, 263;
    a common, 12, 293;
    principles bearing upon the, 13, 31, 156-158;
    in P.U.S., 15, 28, 154-234;
    in Grammar and Public Schools, 85;
    and the formation of habits, 99;
    in Elementary Schools, 155;
    standard set by examinations, 233;
    a complete, suggested by the nature of things, 156


  Damien, Father, 60

  dancing, 234

  Darwin, 3, 4, 5, 54

  _David Copperfield_, 81, 111, 238

  democracy, 312

  Demos clamours for humanistic education, 299

  Denmark, education in, 123, 283-287, 291, 306

  De Quincey, 29, 103, 333

  Departmental Committee on English, 269

  desires, which stimulate mind, 11, 88;
    cater for spiritual sustenance, 11;
    atrophy of, 89;
    _v._ other desires, 247;
    must be used wisely, 56;
    right and wrong, 84

  Dewey, Professor, 280

  Dickens, 81, 111

  discipline, xxix, xxx;
    secured by knowledge-hunger, 11;
    education a, 99-104

  discrimination, 259

  diversion, xxxi

  Divine Spirit, xxxi;
    Divine sanctions, 20

  docility, 68;
    universal, 69;
    _v._ subservience, 71;
    implies equality, 71

  _Doll’s House, The_ (Ibsen), 327

  drawing, 217, 329

  Drighlington Girls’ School, xxv, 236


  economics, 73, 313

  education;
    a liberal, xxv, 8, 21, 78, 92, 127, 235, 250, 261, 264, 266, 271,
        294, 296;
    gives stability of mind, 248;
    makes for sound judgment, 56;
    three instruments of, xxix, 94;
    and atmosphere, xxix, 94-99;
    and discipline of habit, xxix, xxx, 99-104;
    is a life, xxix, 104-111;
    is the Science of Relations, xxx, 31, 154;
    little dependent on heredity and environment, xxxi;
    errors in, 2, 5, 24, 26, 38, 41, 44, 53, 58, 59, 75-77, 82-89, 91,
        94-96, 98, 105, 110, 114-122, 129, 155, 178, 190, 237, 246,
        254, 304;
    a philosophy of, 2, 18, 67;
    and training, 3, 5, 6, 20, 39, 48, 147, 287;
    must nourish mind, 6, 72, 105, 111, 253, 255, 260;
    discoveries in, 9, 62, 68, 104, 255, 256, 290;
    and the Desires, 11, 58, 84-90;
    Knowledge the concern of, 2, 93, 266;
    is of the spirit, 12, 26, 30, 38, 39, 125;
    attention, the prime agent of, 16, 76, 247;
    lacks exact application of principles, 19;
    “new,” 27;
    distinguished from psychology, sociology, pathology, 27;
    in want of a unifying theory, 32;
    does not produce mind, 36;
    and use of leisure, 42, 79, 121;
    the work of, 46, 60, 248, 281, 287;
    the handmaid of Religion, 46, 79, 248;
    business of, always with us, 54;
    of the feelings, 59;
    of the soul, 63;
    drowned by talk, 65;
    and capacity of child, 66;
    a going forth of the mind, 66, 137;
    popular, 76;
    a free, 85, 146;
    definite progress a condition of, 91;
    not mainly gymnastic in function, 108, 236;
    in Denmark and Scandinavia, 123, 125, 283-287, 291, 306;
    in Germany, 123, 125, 279, 280, 306;
    utilitarian, 125, 156, 180, 224, 279-283, 302;
    co-existent with moral bankruptcy, 281;
    in France, 125;
    in Switzerland, 125;
    Secondary, 127, 250-278;
    less liberty than in Primary, 155;
    character, the aim of, 129, 287;
    must fortify will, 131;
    title deeds of, 156;
    beginning of definite, 159;
    a science of proportion, 231-233;
    a social lever, 245;
    solves problems of decent living, 245;
    a venture of faith, 245;
    part and parcel of Religion, 246;
    _v._ Civilisation, 248;
    a common, 249, 264, 296;
    a democratic, 265;
    not for the best children only, 254;
    hindered by materialism, 259;
    an exclusive, our great achievement, 265;
    overlapping in, 265;
    a literary, open to all, 268;
    humanistic, affects conduct, 293;
    an early, from great books, the true foundation of knowledge, 308;
    of the race, 324;
    new systems of, 325;
    result of forty years’, 342;
    should be universal boon like air, 343;
    as exemplified by two Public School boys, 343-348

  Education Act, 121, 122

  Eliot, George, 61

  efficiency, 125

  Elementary Schools, 326;
    P.N.E.U. propaganda on behalf of, xxvii;
    P.U.S. methods in, xxxi, 13, 14, 39, 44, 50, 268;
    books in, 53;
    concentration schemes in, 115;
    A Liberal Education in, 235-249;
    gain by no marks, no places, 247

  _Emile_, by J. J. Rousseau, 338

  _Encyclopædia Britannica_, 5, 17

  ‘English,’ 86, 147, 209-211

  English Literature, 124, 298

  environment, xxix, 94-99;
    educability of children little dependent on, xxxi, 155;
    not way to mind, 38;
    _v._ atmosphere, 96;
    children not products of, 238

  Erasmus, 187, 340

  erudition, 310

  ethics, 14, 254, 274

  _Ethics of the Dust_, by John Ruskin, 223

  Eton, 252, 308, 348

  Eucken, Professor, 249, 296

  Euclid, 152, 233

  eugenics, 313

  eurhythmics, 251, 255

  examinations, 231, 256, 277, 291;
    University entrance, 155, 233;
    and scholarships, 155;
    P.U.S., 158, 167, 168, 171, 178, 220, 221, 241-243, 262, 270, 272,
        293-296;
    should set less exacting standard, 256;
    tests which shall safeguard Letters, 312;
    papers and children’s answers, 195-209

  Ezekiel, 55


  faculties, 11, 17, 259, 263, 266;
    out-of-date, 2, 230, 255;
    Büchner on, 4;
    none to develop, 255, 276

  fallacious arguments, 326

  Fichte, 279, 306

  Fisher, Mr. H. A. L., 53, 122, 126

  Fouillée, M., 110

  Fox, Charles, 29;
    on poetry, 317

  _Four Georges, The_, by Thackeray, 171

  France, Anatole, 317

  France, education in, 125

  Francis, St., 60

  Franklin, the Hon. Mrs., xxviii

  Frederick the Great, 3

  French, the teaching of, 211-213

  French Revolution, The, 4, 92

  Fuller, Thomas, xxvii


  Gaddi, Taddeo, 322

  games, 188;
    should be joyous relaxation rather than stern necessity, 267

  Genesis, 309

  geography, teaching of, 14, 30, 40, 59, 177, 220, 221, 224-230;
    dangers of ‘scientific,’ 41;
    suffers from utilitarian spirit, 224;
    and travel, 226;
    the romance of, 227;
    not generalisations, 227;
    inferential method of teaching, 227-228;
    panoramic method, 227-228;
    literary character of, 228

  geology, teaching of, 221

  geometry, the teaching of, 233

  German, the teaching of, 213

  Germany, moral breakdown of, 3, 123;
    influence of Darwin on, 3, 4;
    utilitarianism in, 6, 123, 125, 280, 286, 306;
    cult of æstheticism in, 95;
    philosophers of, 3, 4;
    school curriculum in, 6;
    efficiency in, 282, 283

  Gibbon, 124

  Gladstone, W. E., 281

  Gloucester teachers’ P.U.S. conference, 183

  Gloucestershire, 51, 90

  God, knowledge of, 64, 65, 158-169, 239, 246, 254, 287, 289, 310,
        315;
    the principal knowledge, 272, 338

  ‘Godfrey Bertram,’ 122

  Goethe, 40, 160-162, 273, 299

  Gordon, General, 141

  Gordon Riots, 130

  Gorky, Maxim, 62

  Gospels, The, 165, 166, 169

  grammar, the teaching of, 7, 10, 141, 151, 152, 209-211, 269

  Greek, 124, 155, 254, 308

  Greeks and the power of words, 316

  Gregory, Sir Richard, on science teaching, 222

  Grundtvig, 125, 283, 284, 291

  _Guy Mannering_, 122, 331

  gymnastics, intellectual and physical _v._ knowledge, 236


  Habit, xxix, 53, 99-104, 128, 147;
    is inevitable, 101;
    a bad master, 101;
    act repeated becomes, 102;
    religious, 103

  Haeckel, Ernst, 4

  Hague, The, 285

  Haldane, Lord, 26

  Hall, Professor Stanley, 280

  _Hamlet_, 179, 183

  handicrafts, xxx, 31, 73, 154, 217, 234, 251, 255, 328

  _Heart of Midlothian_, The, 331

  _Henry VIII_, 170, 173

  Herbart, 112, 113, 114, 117

  Herbartian doctrine, xxx, 113, 117

  Herbert, George, 64

  heredity, educability of children little dependent on, xxxi, 155

  High School girl, the, 326

  history, 14, 30, 42, 50, 59, 62, 73, 77, 151, 157, 169-180, 254,
        267;
    a vital part of education, 169, 273;
    church, 169;
    English, 170-175, 176, 177;
    French, 175, 176, 177;
    ancient, 175, 176, 177, 274;
    Indian, 176, 267;
    European, 176, 177;
    British Empire, 176;
    and literature, 176, 177, 180, 184, 269, 274;
    and citizenship, 185, 274;
    geographical aspects of, 177;
    as a background for thought, 178;
    time given to, 170;
    necessary for a sane life, 178;
    gives weight to decision, consideration to action, stability to
        conduct, 179;
    charts, by Miss Beale, 177

  _Home Education Series_, 6, 27

  Homer, 182, 190

  home work, 9

  hope, we want, 335

  Horace, 78, 264

  horde, spirit of, a dangerous tendency, 300

  Household, Mr. H. W., 90, 212

  House of Education, The, 15, 212, 213, 276

  “howlers,” 158, 256

  Humanism, 240;
    for the people at large, 235

  humanistic training surest basis for business capacity, 285

  ‘Humanities,’ The, 14, 157, 235, 239, 260, 297, 305;
    in English, 298

  human nature, prefers natural to spiritual law, 3;
    a composite whole, 156;
    possibilities of, infinite and various, 156;
    an ordered presentation of the powers of, 189;
    has not failed, 335

  Huxley on the teaching of science, 218

  hygiene, 220


  Ideas, xxix, xxx, 290;
    mind feeds on, xxx, 10, 20, 25, 39, 40, 105, 109, 110, 117, 256;
    informing, xxx, 26, 154;
    initial, xxxi;
    Platonic, 10, 108;
    that influence life, 25;
    give birth to acts, 80, 102, 303;
    potency of, 105;
    rise and progress of, 106, 107;
    Coleridge’s ‘captain,’ 110;
    behaviour of, 113;
    correlation of, 114;
    instruct conscience and stimulate will, 130;
    choice between, 134;
    growth of, 297

  Ignorance, dangers of, 1, 5, 279, 299, 310, 314;
    is not incapacity, 63;
    our national stumbling-block, 239;
    only one cure for, 239

  Imagination, 25, 259;
    present in children, 11, 18, 36, 41, 50;
    present in infant, 37;
    may be stored with evil images, 55

  _Incuria_ of children, 52, 254, 292

  India, 267

  influence, 83

  information _v._ knowledge, 26, 184, 303, 321

  initiative, 25

  insincerity an outcome of ignorance, 326

  integrity, 61

  intellect not a class prerogative, 12;
    enthroned in every child, 50

  intellectual conversion, xxv, xxvi

  intellectual appetite, 56

  intelligence not a matter of inheritance and environment, 12

  introspection, 66

  irresponsibility characterises our generation, 313

  Isaiah, 106, 309, 318

  Italian, teaching of, 213


  James, Professor William, 113, 114

  Japan, 133;
    revolution in, 306

  Jewish nation, history of, 162

  _Joan and Peter_, by H. G. Wells, 95, 252, 266

  Johnson, Dr., 143, 160;
    on questions, 257

  Jordan, xxvi

  judgment, power of, 259;
    present in children, 9, 18

  justice, 60-62


  Kant, 306

  Keble, 167

  Kidd, Benjamin, 69

  _King Lear_, 45, 242

  Kipling, Rudyard, 89, 135, 181

  Kirschensteiner, Dr. and Munich Schools, 280

  knowledge, call of, xxv;
    appetite for, xxx, 10, 11, 14, 18, 20, 29, 44, 53, 57, 77, 89, 90,
        92, 117, 124, 253, 255, 290, 302;
    must be vital, xxx, 39, 44, 105, 154;
    quantity and variety of, xxx, 11, 14, 19, 116, 123, 154, 157, 253,
        256, 257, 263, 288, 289, 290;
    must be literary in form, xxx, 13, 15, 18, 29, 30, 51, 91, 109,
        111, 154, 160, 172, 218, 248, 256, 260, 290;
    assimilation of, xxx, 12, 14, 16, 18, 155, 240, 292;
    the sole concern of education, 2, 12, 93;
    the necessary food of mind, 2, 18, 75, 88, 239, 256, 258;
    consecutive, 7, 158, 172, 244, 261, 267;
    accurate, 8;
    what is? 12, 239, 254, 303;
    a basis of common, for all classes, 20, 78, 264, 293, 298, 299;
    not sensation, 26;
    of good and evil, 46;
    love of, sufficient stimulus for work, 58, 79, 98;
    of God, 64, 65, 158-169, 239, 246, 254, 272, 287, 289, 310, 315,
        338;
    formative influence of, 65;
    brings freedom, 71, 73;
    depreciation of, 76, 301, 316;
    is delectable, 89;
    creates bracing atmosphere, 97;
    _v._ teaching, 118;
    is virtue, 127, 235;
    of man, 169-218, 239, 254, 289, 315;
    of the Universe, 218-234, 239, 254, 289, 316;
    relativity of, and mind, 237, 240, 324;
    stops friction, 238;
    substitutes for, 302;
    ‘The source of pleasure,’ 302;
    Matthew Arnold on, 239;
    received with attention, and fixed by narration, 259;
    not same as academic success, 266;
    unifying effect of, 267;
    ‘Meet for the people,’ 292;
    a distinction between, and scholarship, 305;
    ‘Letters,’ the content of, 308;
    not a store but a state, 309;
    of the Life, the Truth, the Way, 317;
    the basis of a nation’s strength, 321;
    _v._ information, 303, 321;
    mediæval conception of, 321;
    all, is sacred, 324;
    a great unity, 324;
    and ‘learning,’ 325;
    exalteth a nation, 342

  _Kultur_, 286


  Lamb, Charles, 16, 258, 260

  languages, the teaching of, 209-213, 254, 276

  Latin, the teaching of, 94, 124, 155, 213

  League of Nations, 169

  learning, by rote, 257;
    and knowledge, 325;
    labour of, not decreased by narrowing curriculum, 158

  Lecky, Mr., on utilitarian theory, 280

  _Lehrbuch zur Psychologie_, 113

  Leibnitz, 110, 113

  Leonardo da Vinci, 54

  lessons, dull routine, 44

  ‘Letters,’ knowledge and virtue, 307;
    the vehicle of knowledge, 308;
    a knowledge of, necessary, 313;
    make a universal appeal, 333;
    the staple of education, 334

  _Liberal Education, A: Practice_, by A. C. Drury, 157

  life, not enough for our living, 335

  listening, habit of, 244

  Lister, 19, 318

  literary form, children must have, xxx, 15, 18, 29, 30, 51, 91, 109,
        111, 154, 160, 172, 218, 248, 256, 260, 290;
    children educated out of, 13

  Literature, the teaching of, 42, 43, 52, 62, 151, 157, 180-185, 254;
    natural aptitude for, 91;
    illustrates history, 176, 177, 180, 184, 269, 274;
    a living power, 185;
    and history, sole key to unintelligible world, 338;
    reveals deepest things, 338

  Locke, 4, 156

  _Logos_, 330

  Louis XI, 132

  Louis XIV, 92

  Louisa, Queen of Prussia, 306

  Lugard, Lady, 314

  Lysander, 109


  _Macbeth_, 140

  magnanimity, 89, 248, 268

  magnetism, personal, 13, 48, 49

  Magnus, Sir Philip, 280

  maps, 224

  Marconi, 236

  Maria Theresa, 311

  marks, 7, 11, 28, 52, 247, 302;
    unnecessary, 45

  Marx, Karl, 144

  Masefield, John, on vitality of mind, 277

  mathematics, the teaching of, 7, 59, 148, 151, 152, 153, 155,
        230-233, 254, 256, 264, 296;
    appeal to mind, 51;
    beauty and truth of, 230, 334;
    undue importance of, 231;
    not a royal road to learning, 231;
    to be studied for their own sake, 232;
    success should not depend on, 232;
    depend upon the teacher, 233;
    badly taught, 233

  matter, not the foundation of all being, 4;
    and mind, 5

  Memmi, Simone, 284, 322, 323

  Memory, 14, 16;
    mind _v._ word, 173, 263;
    knowledge, mental not verbal, 258, 303

  mental food and work not synonymous terms, 281

  _Method_, Coleridge’s, 106, 107

  method, special points of P.N.E.U.;
    children do the work, 6, 19, 192, 216, 241;
    teachers help, 6, 19, 241;
    single reading, 6, 15, 171, 241, 258, 261, 263, 267, 291, 293,
        304;
    narration, 6, 15, 18, 30, 45, 65, 155, 163, 165, 172, 180, 182,
        190, 191, 211, 241, 261, 272, 276, 291;
    no revision, 6, 9, 15, 171, 241, 245, 262;
    no special selections, 7, 244;
    many books, 7, 12, 15, 30, 59, 76, 241, 267, 268, 271, 303;
    children’s delight in books, 7, 19, 30, 45;
    attention secured by books, 7, 13, 30, 45, 276;
    consecutive knowledge, 7, 158, 172, 244, 261, 267;
    takes less time, 9, 245;
    no preparation, 9, 158, 245;
    children occupied with things as well as books, 31;
    short hours, 158;
    examinations, 158, 167, 168, 171, 178, 195-209, 241-243, 262, 263,
        270, 272;
    children form a good style, 194;
    power of dealing with names, 181, 262, 264, 294-296;
    suitable for large numbers, 247;
    success depends on principles, 270

  ‘Micawber, Mr.,’ 231

  ‘Midas,’ 267

  Milton, 110, 124, 132, 159, 188, 274;
    on ideal of education, 249, 268;
    _Areopagitica_, 188

  Mind, habits of, xxix, 53, 100;
    feeds on ideas, xxix, 2, 10, 15, 18, 20, 25, 39, 40, 105, 111,
        117, 256, 257;
    not a receptacle, xxx, 112;
    a spiritual organism, xxx, 24, 38, 117;
    has appetite, xxx, 10, 20, 39, 57, 89, 281;
    must be fed, xxx, 5, 10, 18, 20, 24, 25, 41, 71, 105, 111, 117,
        154, 236, 239, 246, 259, 263, 281, 288;
    can deal with knowledge, xxx, 10, 18, 41, 72, 117;
    not made up of faculties, 2, 17;
    in education, 2, 6, 253;
    thought alone appeals to, 2, 12, 15;
    is one, 5, 41;
    is spiritual, 5, 38;
    action of, stimulated by desires, 11, 13, 88;
    nature of, 20;
    house of, 24;
    must have labour of digestion, 26, 237;
    the instrument of education, 36;
    spiritual, _v._ physical brain, 38, 100, 260, 330;
    amazing potentialities of, 38;
    ‘the unconscious,’ 38, 66, 130;
    tendency to ignore, 38;
    the means of living, 42;
    good and evil tendencies of, 46, 49, 52;
    not a chartered libertine, 49;
    use of term, 66;
    always conscious, 66;
    heaven of, 71;
    not sustained by physical or emotional activity, 72, 289;
    must not be intruded upon, 130;
    deals with intellectual matter without aids, 172;
    potency not property characteristic of, 237;
    laws of, 245, 246, 290;
    behaviour of, 253;
    duly fed, its activities take care of themselves, 289;
    vast educability of, 289;
    receives knowledge to grow, 237;
    must know, 237;
    wonder of, 239;
    and knowledge, 240, 324;
    functions for its own nourishment, 246;
    of children not immature, 246;
    stability of, 248;
    benefits by occasional gymnastics, 255;
    a crucible, cannot distil from sawdust, 257;
    a deceiver ever, 257;
    outer court of, 257;
    how, works, 257;
    -stuff, 259;
    forces which act in education, 259;
    we must believe in, 260;
    moves altogether when it moves at all, 276;
    demands method, 334

  miracles, 148

  Montagu, Lady Mary Wortley, 36

  Montaigne, on history, 169

  Moral, impulse, 17;
    offences bred in the mind, 188;
    training, 58, 59

  morality, school, 188

  morals, everyday and economics: citizenship, 185-189

  _Mornings in Florence_, by John Ruskin, 323

  Muirhead, Professor, 3

  Munich, 285, 306;
    Schools, 125, 280, 286

  ‘Murdstone, Mr.,’ 81

  Music, 329

  Musical Appreciation, by Mrs. Howard Glover, 217, 218


  Napoleon, 5;
    a great reader, 305, 306

  Napoleonic wars, 125, 279, 283

  Narration, 99, 115, 165, 166, 180, 182, 190, 258-261, 291, 292;
    method of, xxx, 6, 15-17, 29, 30, 51, 64-65, 155, 163, 172-173,
        191, 241, 244, 304;
    _v._ reproduction, 18, 30, 272;
    of slum children, 45, 63;
    depends on single reading, 6, 15, 171, 241, 258, 261, 263, 267,
        291, 293, 304;
    a preparation for public speaking, 86, 124;
    literary expression in, 90;
    Dr. Johnson on, 160;
    must not be interrupted, 172, 191;
    in the teaching of languages, 211-213, 276;
    a natural power, 191

  National Gallery, The, 215

  natural history, the teaching of, 220

  natural selection, 4

  Nature Note Books, 217, 219, 223

  Nature Study, xxx, 73, 154, 219, 328

  needlework, 234

  New Testament, 165, 187;
    teaching of, must be grounded on Old, 161

  Newton, Sir Isaac, 231

  Nietzsche, 3

  Nightingale, Florence, 141

  _Nineteenth Century and After_, 270

  note-taking, 245, 257


  Obedience, natural, necessary and fundamental, xxix, 68-79, 97, 134;
    dignified, 70;
    willing, 70;
    the test of personality, 134

  obligation, 17

  obscene passages, 341

  Old Testament, 160-165, 341;
    as a guide to life, 273

  opinions, _v._ ideas, 110;
    of teacher, 288

  opportunity, doctrine of equal, 92, 179;
    universal, a fallacy, 343

  oral lessons, xxvi, 15, 271

  order, how to keep, 45

  _Ourselves, Our Souls and Bodies_, 188, 189


  _Pagan, The_, 250

  ‘Page, Ann,’ 331

  Paget, Dr. Stephen, on suggestion, 82

  Paley, 9

  ‘Paracelsus,’ 331

  _Parents and Children_, 108

  Parents’ Associations, xxviii

  Parents’ National Educational Union, xxix, 6, 9, 23, 62, 79, 159,
        171, 217, 253, 268, 270;
    mission of, to all classes, xxvii

  P.N.E.U. Philosophy, xxix;
    fits all ages, satisfies brilliant children, helps the dull,
        secures attention, interest, concentration, 28

  Parents’ Union School, xxviii, 13, 45, 78, 212, 217, 223, 233, 235,
        254, 269, 275-277, 293;
    books in, 271;
    education free to Elementary Schools, 296

  Parthenon Room, 175

  Pascal, 256

  Pasteur, 318

  Paterson, Mr. A., 118, 119, 121

  patriotism, a sane, 174

  Paul, St., xxvii, 188, 309

  Pelmanism, the indictment of, 250, 252

  ‘Pendennis, Arthur,’ 159

  People’s High Schools in Denmark, 283-286

  Person, a child is a, xxix, 13, 18, 29, 36, 44, 238;
    chief responsibility of a, to accept ideas, xxxi;
    marks of an educated, 1, 100;
    the more of a, the better citizen, 3, 76, 147;
    the measure of a, 10, 80;
    a, built up from within, 23;
    a, is a mystery, 238;
    a, measured by the wide and familiar use of substantives, 261;
    a, brought up first for his own uses, then for society, 329;
    a, who ‘lives his life,’ 329;
    nobility of a, 334

  personality, respect due to, xxix, 24, 81-84, 97, 100, 125, 129;
    development of, 5, 147;
    of teacher, 7, 172;
    undue play of, 78, 82, 129;
    in narration, 18, 260

  Perthes, Friedrich, 341

  ‘Peter Pan,’ 59

  Pett Ridge, Mr., 119

  ‘Petulengro, Jasper,’ 224

  _Peveril of the Peak_, 282

  philosophy, 43;
    a, necessary to life, 334;
    a consummate, 337

  physical training, xxx, 48, 72, 154, 233, 255

  pictures _v._ descriptions, 340

  picture study, 214-217, 275

  Pied Piper, The, 48

  Piozzi, Mrs., 160

  platitudes, 326

  Plato, 25, 27, 59, 148, 187, 337, 340;
    on ideas, 10, 105, 108;
    on knowledge, 127, 235

  ‘play way,’ a, 251, 255;
    not avenue to mind, 38

  pleasure, grand elementary principle of, 248

  Plutarch, 109, 185-187;
    on history, 274

  poetry, 59, 72, 157

  Poland, 184

  Prayer Book, The, 169

  prejudices, 326

  ‘Prettymans, the Miss,’ 251

  progress, fetish of, 297

  Promethean fable, 322

  Protagoras, 25

  Prussia, 5, 279, 306

  pseudo-knowledge, 340

  psychology, English, 4;
    mythology of ‘faculty,’ 4;
    said to rest on feeling, 5;
    _v._ sociology, allied to pathology, 27;
    modern, 66;
    little known of, 253

  Public Schools, 1, 74, 78, 85, 91, 105, 120, 188, 251, 252, 265,
        266, 297, 301, 308-313, 326, 344;
    our educational achievement, 308;
    ignorance of boys, 309, 310

  public opinion, 314, 320

  _Punch_, 34, 95


  _questionnaire_, dangers of, 54, 257

  ‘Quickly, Mrs.,’ 331


  R’s, the three, 63

  _raconteur_, a good, 173

  reading, a _single_, 6, 15, 171, 241, 258, 261, 263, 267, 291, 293,
        304;
    desultory, not education, 13, 189;
    in order to know, 14;
    and writing, 30, 244;
    must be consecutive, 261, 267

  Reason, 259; the way of the, xxxi;
    present in the infant, 37;
    must not be deified, 55;
    justifies any notion, 55, 143;
    confounded with right, 56;
    does not begin it, 140;
    brings infallible proofs of any idea, 139, 315;
    works involuntarily, 142;
    is subject to habit, 147;
    is fallible, 150, 314;
    and rebellion, 314;
    cannot take the place of knowledge, 314

  reflection, 25

  religion, 14, 40, 43, 46, 64, 73, 79, 239, 289;
    teaching of, 159-169;
    two aspects of, 160-161;
    difficulties in, 162, 164

  Rembrandt, 63, 215

  Renaissance, The, xxv, 9, 54;
    Italian and French, 311;
    Schools, 343

  Repington, Colonel, 232, 252

  reproduction, 259

  ‘Responsions,’ 311

  retention, 259

  revision of lessons, 6, 9, 15, 171, 241, 245, 262

  rewards, 7

  _Richard III_, 143

  Richelieu, 90

  Roberts, Lord, 141

  Rosetta Stone, 63

  Rossetti, 340

  Rousseau, J. J., 325, 338, 339

  Ruskin, John, 110, 152, 230, 322, 323, 326

  Russia, 320;
    Soviet, 145


  St. Cross, 332

  Salisbury, Lord, 281

  _Saviour of the World, The_, 167

  Scandinavia, education in, 123, 125

  scholarship, an exquisite distinction, 310;
    _v._ knowledge, 305

  schools, not merely a nursery for the formation of character, 264;
    find substitutes for knowledge, 266

  _Schwärmerei_, 49

  Science, xxx, 14, 31, 40, 42, 51, 59, 154, 157, 239, 256;
    teaching of, 218-230, 275;
    approached by field-work, with literary comments, 223, 256;
    fatal divorce between, and the ‘humanities,’ 223, 318;
    must rouse wonder, 224, 317;
    the mode of revelation granted to our generation, 318;
    waiting for its literature, 318;
    of relations, 327;
    of the proportion of things, 327

  Science, Social, 14

  Scott, Sir Walter, 110, 182, 190, 261

  Scottish philosophers, 11

  scrupulosity of to-day, 101

  Secondary Schools, 127;
    a liberal education in, 250-278

  self-authority, 17, 71, 74, 75, 76

  self-culture, not an ideal, 133

  self-direction necessary, 131

  self-education comes from within, 23;
    education must be, 26, 28-32, 38, 77, 99, 240, 241, 289

  self-expression, 66, 108, 276, 326, 327

  _Self-Help_, by Dr. Smiles, 248

  self-knowledge, 131, 137

  sensory activities, 2, 48

  Shakespeare, 55, 124, 143, 167, 170, 182, 183, 245, 270, 274, 314,
        341

  Shaw, Mr. Bernard, 27

  Sisyphus, 240

  ‘Skimpole, Harold,’ 231

  Socialism, 320

  Socrates, 49, 302, 332;
    use of questioning, 17

  Sophocles, 124

  soul, well-being of the, 63;
    the Holy of Holies, 63;
    satisfaction for, 64

  specialisation, dangers of, 53, 254

  spelling, 271

  Spirit, Divine, xxxi;
    is the man, 5;
    education is of the, 12, 26, 30;
    born of spirit, 39;
    use of term, 65;
    acts upon matter, 100;
    is might, reveals itself in spirit, works only in freedom, 125,
        284

  spontaneity, condition of development, xxxi

  ‘Squeers, Mr.,’ 101

  stability, mark of educated classes, 179

  _Statue and the Bust, The_, 133

  Stein, 279

  Steinthal, Mrs. Francis, xxv

  stops, use of, 191

  Stuart educational ideals, 326

  “Studies serve for delight,” xxvi, 7, 19, 266;
    make for personality, 5

  Suggestion, xxxi, 82, 83;
    a grave offence, 129;
    weakens moral fibre, 129;
    causes involuntary action, 129;
    weakens power of choice, 130

  superman, 3, 4

  Sweden, 285

  Switzerland, education in, 125

  syllabus, points to be considered in a, xxx, 154, 268;
    a wide, 256;
    the best, 268;
    a, must meet demands of mind, 256;
    sterile, of schoolboy, 268

  sympathy of numbers, 247


  ‘tales,’ 30, 132, 190

  teacher, part of, in education, 6, 19, 118, 130, 237, 240, 241, 246,
        260, 261, 304;
    personality of, 7, 48, 78, 82, 129, 172;
    intellectual apparatus of, 11;
    not a mere instrument, 32;
    must understand human nature of child, 47;
    underrates tastes and abilities of children, 52, 238;
    must read aloud with intention, 244;
    comes between children and knowledge, 247;
    finds education a passion, 251

  teaching how to learn, a farce, 348

  Tennyson, 138, 333

  things, “are in the saddle,” 7, 260;
    children occupied with, 31

  thinking, not doing, a source of character, 278

  thought, not simply a function of brain, 2, 4, 260;
    great, necessary for children, 5, 12, 130;
    alone appeals to mind, 12;
    begets thought, 12, 303;
    action follows on due, 24;
    our, not our own, 60, 137;
    right, not self-expression, follows upon an idea, 130;
    socialistic, fallacies in, 144-147;
    sins committed in, 188;
    common basis of, 264, 298

  Thucydides, 124

  _Timon of Athens_, 44

  ‘Titanic,’ 335

  Trades’ Unions, 315;
    Guilds, 319

  Traherne, 34, 36, 37, 40

  Training, intellectual, 2, 24, 147, 255;
    physical, 2, 6, 20, 48, 255;
    vocational, 2, 3, 5, 6, 287, 302;
    not education, 255

  Treitschke, 3

  Trench, 167

  Trollope, A., 251

  truth, justice in word, 61

  Tudor women, 311

  Tugendbund, 6, 279


  Ulysses, 41

  _Undine_, xxv

  Universities, People’s, 123

  unrest comes from wrong thinking, 60;
    Labour, 92, 179, 286, 297, 300, 319;
    Indian, 184


  Van Eyck’s, ‘Adoration of the Lamb,’ 322

  Vasari, 54

  Vaughan, 35

  verbal understanding _v._ dealing with books, 172

  Vienna, Congress of, 170

  village community life, 286

  Vittorino, 310

  Voltaire, 156


  _Waverley Novels, The_, 63, 325

  Wellington, The Duke of, 102, 308

  Whichcote, xxix, 33

  Whitby, 223

  White, Gilbert, 223

  wilfulness, signs of, 37

  Will, the way of the, xxxi, 128, 131;
    function of, to choose, 128, 129, 133;
    action of, is character, 129;
    the safeguard of a man, 130;
    and danger of suggestion, 130;
    education must fortify, 131;
    the governing power of man, 131;
    fallacies concerning, 132;
    nourished upon ideas, 132;
    must have objects outside self, 133;
    the function of man, 133;
    implies understanding, 133;
    a free agent, 133;
    is supreme, 135;
    needs diversion, 136;
    free, not free thought, 136, 137;
    ordering of, 137;
    is the man, 314

  Witte, Count, 130

  words, beauty of, 151;
    vehicle of truth, 151;
    use of, 316

  Wordsworth, William, 35, 93, 166, 180, 238, 276, 320, 322

  work, the better man does the better, 282

  working men and their leisure, 42

  worship, a sublime ideal, 317

  Wren, Sir Christopher, 54

  writing, 30


  Yorkshire, Drighlington School, xxv, 236




FOOTNOTES:

[1] Now ten.

[2] Now ten.

[3] Now over 300 in 1924.

[4] I quote from the article on Psychology in the _Encyclopædia
Britannica_ as being the most likely to exhibit the authoritative
position.

[5] _The Home Education Series._

[6] In connection with the _Parents’ Union School_.

[7] The small Practising School attached to the House of Education
(ages of scholars from six to eighteen) affords opportunities for
testing the programmes of work sent out term by term, and the
examinations set at the end of each term. The work in each Form is
easily done in the hours of morning-school.

[8] I again quote from the article on Psychology in the
_Encyclopædia Britannica_.

[9] See _Some Discussions of the Method_. (P.N.E.U. Office, 1/-).

[10] _The Home Education Series._

[11] _Home Education_, by the Writer.

[12] See _Some Studies in the Formation of Character_, by the
Writer.

[13] See _Some Impressions of the Ambleside Method_. (P.N.E.U.
Office, price 9d.)

[14] See _Ourselves, our Souls and Bodies_. By the Writer.
(P.N.E.U. Office.)

[15] _Ourselves, our Souls and Bodies._ By the Writer.

[16] _Parents and Children._ By the Writer.

[17] See _Some Impressions of the Ambleside Method_. (P.N.E.U.
Office, price 9d.)

[18] Isaiah xxviii.

[19] _Parents and Children_, by the Writer.

[20] _Education from a National Standpoint._

[21] _The Herbartian Psychology applied to Education_, by John
Adams.

[22] _Across the Bridges_, by A. Paterson.

[23] _Across the Bridges_, by A. Paterson.

[24] _Memoirs of Count Witte._

[25] _Education of the Young._

[26] _What Religion Is_, by Bernard Bosanquet, D.C.L.

[27] All particulars may be had from The Director, Parents’ Union
School, Ambleside. The illustrations in the way of children’s
answers for the various sections of this chapter have been omitted
for want of space, except in the case of a few answers under
Composition.

[28] Examples of the work of scholars of various ages illustrating
what has been said may be seen at the P.N.E.U. Office.

[29] This book is now in print again.

[30] Of the Parents’ Union School.

[31] Examination papers giving some idea of the scope of the
history studies in the P.U.S. may be seen at the P.N.E.U. Office.

[32] Examination Papers can be seen at the P.N.E.U. Office.

[33] Examination Papers can be seen at the P.N.E.U. Office.

[34] These answers are uncorrected and are taken from Examination
papers not sent back. Most parents and teachers have their papers
returned.

[35] Examination answers can be seen at the P.N.E.U. Office.

[36] For details see the Parents’ Union School programmes.

[37] Specimens of the children’s Examination work can be seen at
the P.N.E.U. Office.

[38] _The Ambleside Geography_; Book IV, by the Writer.

[39] _Ambleside Geography_: Book IV.

[40] _The Ambleside Geography_: Book V, by the Writer.

[41] For details see the Parents’ Union School programmes.

[42] _Citizens to Be_, by Miss M. L. V. Hughes.

[43] cf. “Introduction.”

[44] pp. 13 to 15.

[45] The P.U.S. was started in 1890.

[46] These are omitted for want of space but other sets can be seen
at the Office of the P.N.E.U.

[47] Chapter X.

[48] See Chapter X.

[49] cf. _Continuation Schools_, ed. by Sir Michael Sadler, and
published by the Manchester University, 1908, to which the writer
is greatly indebted.

[50] Page 106.

[51] 1890.

[52] 1913.

[53] In Elementary and Continuation Schools.

[54] The Author owes to the Editor of _The Times_ permission to
reprint the chapters under this heading written in 1912; as also
the happy titles of the several chapters and the general title.




  TRANSCRIBER’S NOTE

  Footnote [47] is referenced twice from page 275.

  Obvious typographical errors and punctuation errors have been
  corrected after careful comparison with other occurrences within
  the text and consultation of external sources.

  Except for those changes noted below, all misspellings in the text,
  and inconsistent or archaic usage, have been retained.

  Pg xxii: an entry for ‘INDEX   349’ has been added at the end of
           the Table of Contents.
  Pg 3: ‘about Nietszche’ replaced by ‘about Nietzsche’.
  Pg 17: ‘a congerie of’ replaced by ‘a coterie of’.
  Pg 72: ‘Not, again, can we’ replaced by ‘Nor, again, can we’.
  Pg 82: ‘the idiosyncracies’ replaced by ‘the idiosyncrasies’.
  Pg 89: ‘satiable curtiosity’ replaced by ‘satiable curiosity’.
  Pg 139: ‘irrefragible proofs’ replaced by ‘irrefragable proofs’.
  Pg 140: ‘no more then they’ replaced by ‘no more than they’.
  Pg 168: ‘clothes and ca e’ replaced by ‘clothes and care’.
  Pg 181: ‘by naming it D2’ replaced by ‘by naming it K2’.
  Pg 197: ‘statemen all’ replaced by ‘statesmen all’.
  Pg 200: ‘And ne tles close’ replaced by ‘And nestles close’.
  Pg 202: ‘eyes for thoes’ replaced by ‘eyes for those’.
  Pg 232: ‘perfer not to have’ replaced by ‘prefer not to have’.
  Pg 275: ‘by Velasqeuz which’ replaced by ‘by Velasquez which’.
  Pg 334: ‘irrefragibly logical’ replaced ‘irrefragably logical’.
  Pg 357: ‘Nietszche, 3’ replaced by ‘Nietzsche, 3’.



*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK AN ESSAY TOWARDS A PHILOSOPHY OF EDUCATION: A LIBERAL EDUCATION FOR ALL ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG™ LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg™ License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg

Project Gutenberg is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 41 Watchung Plaza #516,
Montclair NJ 07042, USA, +1 (862) 621-9288. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.


